One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten
Counting from one to ten in Nweh
Giraffe
Leopard
Happy New Year
To everyone
Lion
Chief
The nweh Alphabet
I shoot.
I shot an animal.
I will shoot an animal later in the day.
I will shoot an animal tomorrow.
Let me shoot an animal.
If I shoot an animal, it will die.
I shot an animal in the morning.
I shot an animal the day before yesterday.
I shot an animal a long time ago.
You are shooting an animal.
You were shooting an animal yesterday.
Shoot that animal!
Have you shot it?
Did you shoot that animal in the morning?
Is it dawn ?
Good morning To you people.
Good morning.
How do you do?
Did you sleep well?
How are you?
How are you dear?
Are you well?
Are you healthy?
Is the family healthy?
Are your children well?
Are the children healthy?
I greet everybody in this house.
I greet everybody here.
Have you greeted your friend?
I greet each and everone in the house.
When you arrive, greet your younger ones.
Is your mother in the house?
Is there water in this house?
Who is he/she ?
Who is he/she?
Is that what he/she has said?
Is there water in this house?
Has he/she come?
Has he constructed the chair?
Has he played it?
Have you people drunk it?
Has he/she descended?
Has he/she come down?
Who is this?
Has Asong rubbed it?
Has he taken it back?
Have you removed it?
Where has your father gone to?
Who?
Whose child are you?
Who is he?
Who is he/she?
He as who?
Who is he/she looking for?
Where does he/she live?
I am the son of Asonganyi.
What is the name of your mother?
Who is your mother?
What is your name?
What is your name?
Has he/she taken/given the enema?
Have you tied it?
Has he/she told it?
Has he/she allowed it?
Is it alright? 
Is it okay?
Has he/she narrated it?
Has he/she said it?
Have you pressed it?
Has Anang danced?
Has it stood well?
Has he/she accepted/agreed?
Has he shot it?
Verb tenses, moods and aspects
To hate
To abhor
To abominate
To execrate
To detest
I hate your attitude.
He will hate us.
If he hates you, he will 'hang' on you.
He hated me to a greater extent.
He will hate you people tomorrow.
He will never stop hating him/her.
Why are you hating this child?
The only person who can truly hate a person is God.
The act of hating each other is not good.
To cover
I cover
You cover
He/she covers
We cover
You and I cover
Somebody and I cover
You people cover
They cover
Cover your mouth!
Tell her to cover her genitals.
Did you cover that thing with grass?
If he realises that it is not well covered, let him cover it again.
He will cover it later on.
He covered it long ago.
He will cover tomorrow.
He/she will cover it after tomorrow.
He/she will one day cover it.
To cheat
To deceive 
Blindfold 
To fool
He has cheated me.
You like cheating children a lot.
He cheated her a lot.
He cheated us yesterday.
He cheated us the day before yesterday.
If he cheats you, tell me.
If I cheat you, will you like it?
He/she will cheat, you will see.
He/she will cheat tomorrow.
He/she will cheat later on in the day.
He/she will cheat you someday.
Let him cheat her and see!
Trim hair
Trim this child's hair.
He did not trim your hair well.
Who trimmed your hair this morning?
You should trim that child's hair.
I have already trimmed the hair.
I have already trimmed the hair.
Trim and give me the pair of scissors.
If you trim it badly, then you will get it hot.
Don't trim it!
He has already trimmed it.
To blister.
His/her hand has bilstered, his hand blisters.
To search
Look for a cutlass in the room and give me.
Come and be looking after this fire let it not burn this meat.
If you look for it and can't find it, allow it.
Did you look for that thing?
He was looking for you this morning .
Look for it tomorrow and keep let me come and collect.
To confound
To force oneself to do things one does not know but claims to know
You often confound yourself.
You cannot confound yourself as much as Asonganya.
The level of confusion is very high.
The extent to which he confounds himself is beyound understanding
To become sour
To bark
When food is sour, it is no longer good to eat.
This plantain is sour.
Plantain
This plantain is sour.
This plantain will get sour.
This plantain will get sour.
This plantain will get sour tomorrow.
This plantain will get sour after tomorrow.
This plantain got sour this morning.
This plantain got sour this morning.
This plantain got sour the day before yesterday.
This plantain got sour a long time ago.
This plantain is developing a sour taste.
This plantain was getting sour.
To become damaged
That vehicle has become completely damaged.
Vehicle
The child's hips become completely damaged.
You make too much noise with objects.
You have made enough clatter of noise.
Who is making that clatter of noise?
He made a lot of noise in my ears.
He will make a clutter of noise.
He will make a clutter of noise.
He will make a clutter of noise tomorrow.
He will one day make a clatter of noise.
Noise
To plait hair
To entwine a rope
Plait my hair for me.
Has she finished plainting?
Plait this child's hair.
She will plait her hair.
She plaited the hair this morning.
She plaited the hair yesterday.
She plaited the hair the day before yesterday.
She plaited the hair a long time ago.
Hair 
plait quickly
There are people outside looking for you to plait their hair.
You will plait my hair.
To hate each other
The way you people hate each other is too much.
come closer
next
Come closer to this place.
He is my close follower.
It will come closer.
It will one day come closer.
He came closer to him.
To be low down
This house is low.
That house does not please me as much as this one.
This door is low.
House
Door
To get ripe 
become red
The avocado is ripe.
Avocado
The avocado is not yet ripe.
Avocado will get ripe.
If the avocado gets ripe, I eat it.
This avocado was not ripe as of yesterday.
The avocado got ripe to the extent of getting bad.
The avocado got ripe before getting bad.
Coffee is ripe.
Coffee
They don't like ripe plaintain.
To blush
So many bananas have gotten ripe in this yard.
To hate
He will hate us without a reason.
You will hate us later on today.
He will hate us.
The plantain is ripe
Is the plantain ripe?
The plantain will get ripe.
The plantain is not yet ripe.
The plantain was not yet ripe.
The plantain got ripe yesterday.
The plantain got ripe the day before yesterday.
The plantain got ripe long ago.
So many plantains have gotten ripe in the farm.
His hair looks brownish as if he is ill.
My cocoa has withered completely.
Cocoa
To faint
covulse
lose consciousness
Who has fainted and is lying there like that?
He/she fainted this morning.
He/she fainted yesterday.
He/she fainted a long time ago.
He will faint.
He/she will faint later on in the day.
He/she will faint tomorrow.
He/she will faint someday.
To prepare
To pack things
Prepare and come let us go and see him/her.
When you shall have finished you come take this baby let me see.
Get up tomorrow very early, then prepare and come.
He/she will one day faint.
To originate
Where does it/he/she come from?
Where is he/she from?
Where will he come from?
Wherever he comes from, what is your concern there?
To accept
To agree
To admit
Has he/she answered?
Has he/she agreed?
Has he/she addmitted?
Admit it, you will be free.
Should he/she accept?
If you don't admit it, I deal with you.
Did he/she accept?
Did he/she agree?
Did he/she admit it?
In the morning, you and I thought that he/she was coming.
If he accepted, it would be his/her look out.
Should I accept?
Should I agree?
Should I admit?
Answer then!
Answer
Do you agree to that?
Let us agree/take it like that.
Is that the person who was confessing his evil deeds in church yesterday who is still there carrying out evil acts like that?
God
Do you agree?
To pick
To narrate
Pass and stand there, pick it and put here.
Has she/he picked it?
You said you did not pick it, did you?
Pick it quickly and bring.
Let me pick it.
Look at how I pick it.
Pick it and bring.
Can he/she pick it?
He will pick it later on today.
If he happens to pick it later on in the day, you allow him/her to go with it.
If I lay my hands on you, you 'will finish' -die.
Should I pick it for you to see?
To carry on the head
Stand there with your large mouth.
You will carry it.
He will one day carry it. When he returns, he will cary it.
I have carried it.
He/she likes bearing people grudges a lot.
He is a very proud/boastful fellow.
Recount a story
Pass and stand here and narrate the story how it happened.
Pick those beans and bring.
If what you will tell me is not convincing, I will deal with you.
To exist
To be
To be able to
If it is like that you tell me.
When it will be like that, you will tell me.
When it is like that you tell me.
When it is like that you tell me.
When it happens to be like that one day, you tell me.
He respects himself so much.
He pays himself alot.
Can he/she come now?
He is not there.
It is not there.
He/she exists/is there.
What can you do to me?
He will be there tomorrow.
It is not yet available.
He will surely be getting people crying.
In that case you come tomorrow.
It is now available.
To stir
To feel sick
I am feeling sick.
I am feeling like to vomit.
Has he/she/it turned him/her/itself?
Go out and stir those pumpkin seeds
He has broken the wood.
Don't break that stick!
Let us break it and see.
I will not break it.
He wants to break it.
Break it and give a piece of it to him.
Let me take that stick, break into pieces and throw away.
His child died of a sudden and of a mysterious death.
Have your hands been broken?
He caused me to laugh protractedly.
He is licking his mouth.
Lick it!
He will lick his hands.
Let me lick it.
He licked it long ago.
The dog is lapping water.
I want to lick it.
He has not licked it.
You were licking it repeatedly in the morning.
He has rolled up to that point.
He should roll on the ground.
He will roll on the ground.
He will roll on the ground tomorrow.
He will roll on the ground days after tomorrow.
He rolled on the ground yesterday.
He rolled on the ground the day before yesterday.
He rolled on the ground many years ago.
To get missing
I have become blind.
He has incurred losses in that business.
He got missing this morning.
He got missing yesterday.
He got missing days before yesterday.
He got missing a long time ago.
You will one day get missing.
You will one day incure losses.
You will get missing this afternoon.
You will get missing tomorrow.
You will get missing days after tomorrow.
If it gets missing, I deal with you.
Let it get missing
To peel
What are we going to do with this large quantity of plantains he has peeled?
They are peeling a lot of plantains.
To rot
To decay
All his teeth are decayed.
This banana is rotten.
Banana
It will get rotten.
It is decayed/rotten.
I discovered it was rotten.
Have you asked my opinion?
You should ask your father's opinion before accepting/agreeing.
To Spoil
Destroy
Damage
To mar
He was backbiting your name yesterday.
He was spoiling your name yesterday.
He has already spoiled it.
You spoiled it.
Stop wasting that water!
Water
If he is wasting it, stop him.
He wasted all his money.
To roam
Be thriftless
To wonder aimlessly
They are wandering aimlessly.
The way he roams about!
To guard
To watch
To protect
Guard your bag.
Come and keep guard over this poached rat.
He has watched it.
He has guarded it.
He is just from watching/guarding it.
He will guard.
He will watch.
He will waylay
He will guard you later today.
He will guard you tomorrow.
He will guard you days after tomorrow.
Don't guard/watch!
Go ahead!
He has arrived first.
Send it back.
He should send it back!
He will send it back.
He has never returned it.
Did he return it?
If he returns it tell me.
If When he returns tell me.
He has used soil to cover the soup that poured on the ground.
You should cover it with soil.
You will come with soil this afternoon to fill it.
He covered it with soil long ago.
To return
Go back there!
He has not gone to where he was about to go?
He no longer knows me!
He will return.
He returned to town.
To dance.
Come and dance let me see.
Why are you dancing?
Dance let me see!
I enjoyed his dancing style a lot.
Dance let us see.
He finished dancing long ago.
To explode
Still be 
He has not yet picked it.
Still/continue to come.
What has just exploded like that?
He is still there.
He is still alive.
To build
He has built a house.
He is building a bridge.
He built a house this morning.
He will build a house.
Have you not built that house?
What has demolished that house?
You will demolish a house tomorrow.
He demolished a house.
To bark
Whom is the dog barking like that?
The dog has barked.
It barked a lot yesterday.
Please, bark!
He was stirred the water and turned it dirty.
It just confuses me.
I will disown you.
Why are you claiming innocence?
To confuse
To bewilder
Don't confuse the child!
To lack
To want
He lacks what to do.
He will lack money.
He does not lack anything.
What did he lack yesterday?
I won't confuse on what to do.
To join
To add 
To combine
Join this food.
They have had sexual intercourse.
He will join it later in the day.
He did not join it.
To dry
To sun
Spread out your clothes to dry here.
You spread out clothes.
You will spread out clothes.
You will spread out clothes one day.
You will spread out clothes tomorrow.
If you spread out clothes tomorrow they will get dry.
You are spreading out clothes for them to get dry.
You will spread out clothes one day.
Clothes
 If you spread out clothes, they will get dry.
You are spreading out clothes continuously.
Will you dry it?
He builds bridges.
He should build a bridge.
Bridge
He build a bridge the day before yesterday.
He built a bridge a long time ago.
When/if he happens to build a bridge, tell me.
He has built a bridge.
He will build a bridge.
He will one day build a bridge.
He will build a bridge later in the day.
He will build a bridge tomorrow.
He will build a bridge one day.
If he builds a bridge I will know.
To fear
To dread
What are you afraid of?
I fear you.
Don't be afraid!
I will fear.
I will one day fear.
He is being afraid.
Do you fear?
Fear
Pour this wine in here.
This house is low.
To have
Possess
Own
When you have money, you buy useless things.
Money
When you will have money, you will buy useless things.
When you have money, you should buy useless things.
If you have money, you buy useless things.
He is courageous.
You are unfortunate.
I have a matter to discuss with you.
Do you have somebody there?
He is strong, powerful.
She has a broad face.
Have you got a solution to the problem?
You please me.
You look good.
You have a bad character.
It will be good.
It will one day be good.
When it is fine, you give my own share.
This child is physically beautiful but has a bad character.
It will be good later on in the day.
It will be good tomorrow.
It will be good one day.
It was not good in the morning.
It was not good yesterday.
It was not good the other day.
Let him be fine let me see.
To be good
To be nice
To be handsome
To be beautiful
To be tasteful.
To be pretty.
The leg got rotten
Leg
It will get rotten.
It will one day get rotten.
It will get rotten tomorrow.
To get missing
To lose
It is missing.
It got missing.
It will get missing.
If it gets missing, I deal with you.
It is quenching.
It is getting missing.
It got missing this morning.
It got missing/quenched yesterday.
It got missing/quenched the day before yesterday.
It got missing/quenched a long time ago.
To cool
He should cool his temper.
He has cooled his temper.
Cool it!
To stir.
He stirs his body.
He has stirred his body.
He should stir his body.
Lord, it is good to give thanks to you.
The word of the lord.
Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good, his love is everlasting.
Thanks be to God.
The community of believers was of one heart and mind, and no one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but they had everything in common.
With great power the apostles bore witness to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great favor was accorded them all.
There was no needy person among them, for those who owned property or houses would sell them, bring the proceeds of the sale,
and put them at the feet of the apostles, and they were distributed to each according to need.
Let the house of Israel say,
His mercy endures forever.”
Let the house of Aaron say,
His mercy endures forever.”
Let those who fear the LORD say,
His mercy endures forever.”
I was hard pressed and was falling, but the LORD helped me.
My strength and my courage is the LORD, and he has been my savior.
The joyful shout of victory in the tents of the just
The stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone.
By the LORD has this been done it is wonderful in our eyes.
This is the day the LORD has made let us be glad and rejoice in it.
Beloved,
Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten by God, and everyone who loves the Father loves also the one begotten by him.
In this way we know that we love the children of God when we love God and obey his commandments.
For the love of God is this, that we keep his commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome,
for whoever is begotten by God conquers the world. And the victory that conquers the world is our faith.
Who indeed is the victor over the world but the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
his is the one who came through water and blood, Jesus Christ, not by water alone, but by water and blood. The Spirit is the one that testifies, and the Spirit is truth.
On the evening of that first day of the week, when the doors were locked, where the disciples were, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them, and whose sins you retain are retained.”
Thomas, called Didymus, one of the Twelve, was not with them when Jesus came.
So the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” But he said to them, “Unless I see the mark of the nails in his hands and put my finger into the nailmarks and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.”
Now a week later his disciples were again inside and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, although the doors were locked, and stood in their midst and said, “Peace be with you.”
Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here and see my hands, and bring your hand and put it into my side, and do not be unbelieving, but believe.”
Thomas answered and said to him, “My Lord and my God!”
Jesus said to him, “Have you come to believe because you have seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.”
Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples that are not written in this book.
But these are written that you may come to believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that through this belief you may have life in his name.
Thus says the Lord GOD:
I, too, will take from the crest of the cedar,
from its topmost branches tear off a tender shoot, and plant it on a high and lofty mountain 
on the mountain heights of Israel I will plant it.
It shall put forth branches and bear fruit, and become a majestic cedar.
Birds of every kind shall dwell beneath it,
every winged thing in the shade of its boughs.
And all the trees of the field shall know
that I, the LORD, bring low the high tree, lift high the lowly tree,
wither up the green tree, and make the withered tree bloom.
As I, the LORD, have spoken, so will I do.
It is good to give thanks to the LORD,
to sing praise to your name, Most High,
To proclaim your kindness at dawn and your faithfulness throughout the night.
The just one shall flourish like the palm tree, like a cedar of Lebanon shall he grow.
They that are planted in the house of the LORD
shall flourish in the courts of our God.
They shall bear fruit even in old age vigorous and sturdy shall they be,
Declaring how just is the LORD, my rock, in whom there is no wrong.
Brothers and sisters,
We are always courageous, although we know that while we are at home in the body
we are away from the Lord, for we walk by faith, not by sight.
Yet we are courageous, and we would rather leave the body and go home to the Lord.
Therefore, we aspire to please him,
whether we are at home or away.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
so that each may receive recompense,
according to what he did in the body, whether good or evil.
Jesus said to the crowds,
This is how it is with the kingdom of God it is as if a man were to scatter seed on the land
and would sleep and rise night and day
and through it all the seed would sprout and grow, he knows not how.
Of its own accord the land yields fruit,
first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.
And when the grain is ripe, he wields the sickle at once, for the harvest has come.”
He said,
“To what shall we compare the kingdom of God,
or what parable can we use for it?
It is like a mustard seed that, when it is sown in the ground,
is the smallest of all the seeds on the earth.
But once it is sown, it springs up and becomes the largest of plants
and puts forth large branches, so that the birds of the sky can dwell in its shade.”
With many such parables he spoke the word to them as they were able to understand it.
Without parables he did not speak to them,
but to his own disciples he explained everything in private.
Amaziah, priest of Bethel, said to Amos, Off with you, visionary, flee to the land of Judah! 
There earn your bread by prophesying,
but never again prophesy in Bethel for it is the king’s sanctuary and a royal temple.” 
Amos answered Amaziah, “I was no prophet,
nor have I belonged to a company of prophets
I was a shepherd and a dresser of sycamores. 
The LORD took me from following the flock, and said to me, go, prophesy to my people Israel.”
Lord, let us see your kindness, and grant us your salvation.
I will hear what God proclaims the LORD for he proclaims peace.
Near indeed is his salvation to those who fear him, glory dwelling in our land.
Kindness and truth shall meet justice and peace shall kiss.
Truth shall spring out of the earth, and justice shall look down from heaven.
The LORD himself will give his benefits our land shall yield its increase.
Justice shall walk before him, and prepare the way of his steps.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ
with every spiritual blessing in the heavens, as he chose us in him, before the foundation of the world,
to be holy and without blemish before him. 
In love he destined us for adoption to himself through Jesus Christ,
in accord with the favor of his will,
for the praise of the glory of his grace
that he granted us in the beloved.
In him we have redemption by his blood, the forgiveness of transgressions,
in accord with the riches of his grace that he lavished upon us. 
In all wisdom and insight, he has made known to us
the mystery of his will in accord with his favor
that he set forth in him as a plan for the fullness of times,
to sum up all things in Christ, in heaven and on earth.
In him we were also chosen, destined in accord with the purpose of the One
who accomplishes all things according to the intention of his will,
so that we might exist for the praise of his glory,
we who first hoped in Christ. 
In him you also, who have heard the word of truth,
the gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him, were sealed with the promised holy Spirit,
which is the first installment of our inheritance
toward redemption as God’s possession, to the praise of his glory.
Jesus summoned the Twelve and began to send them out two by two
and gave them authority over unclean spirits. 
He instructed them to take nothing for the journey
but a walking stick no food, no sack, no money in their belts. 
They were, however, to wear sandals but not a second tunic. 
He said to them,
“Wherever you enter a house, stay there until you leave. 
Whatever place does not welcome you or listen to you,
leave there and shake the dust off your feet
in testimony against them.” 
So they went off and preached repentance. 
The Twelve drove out many demons, and they anointed with oil many who were sick and cured them.
As the LORD spoke to me, the spirit entered into me
and set me on my feet, and I heard the one who was speaking say to me:
Son of man, I am sending you to the Israelites,
rebels who have rebelled against me
they and their ancestors have revolted against me to this very day.
Hard of face and obstinate of heart are they to whom I am sending you.
But you shall say to them: Thus says the LORD GOD!
And whether they heed or resist for they are a rebellious house—
they shall know that a prophet has been among them.
Our eyes are fixed on the Lord, pleading for his mercy.
To you I lift up my eyes who are enthroned in heaven 
As the eyes of servants are on the hands of their masters.
As the eyes of a maid are on the hands of her mistress,
So are our eyes on the LORD, our God,
till he have pity on us.
Have pity on us, O LORD, have pity on us,
for we are more than sated with contempt our souls are more than sated
with the mockery of the arrogant,with the contempt of the proud.
Brothers and sisters,
That I, Paul, might not become too elated, because of the abundance of the revelations,
a thorn in the flesh was given to me, an angel of Satan,
to beat me, to keep me from being too elated.
Three times I begged the Lord about this, that it might leave me,
but he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for power is made perfect in weakness.”
I will rather boast most gladly of my weaknesses, in order that the power of Christ may dwell with me.
Therefore, I am content with weaknesses, insults,
hardships, persecutions, and constraints, for the sake of Christ for when I am weak, then I am strong.
Jesus departed from there and came to his native place, accompanied by his disciples.
When the sabbath came he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were astonished.
They said, “Where did this man get all this? what kind of wisdom has been given him?
What mighty deeds are wrought by his hands! is he not the carpenter, the son of Mary,
and the brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us?” 
And they took offense at him.
Jesus said to them,“A prophet is not without honor except in his native place
and among his own kin and in his own house.”
So he was not able to perform any mighty deed there,
apart from curing a few sick people by laying his hands on them.
He was amazed at their lack of faith.
When the time for Pentecost was fulfilled, they were all in one place together.
And suddenly there came from the sky a noise like a strong driving wind, and it filled the entire house in which they were.
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, which parted and came to rest on each one of them.
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in different tongues, 
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim.
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven staying in Jerusalem.
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, but they were confused
because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, “Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans?
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language?
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia,
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene,
as well as travelers from Rome,
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs,
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues of the mighty acts of God.”
Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth.
Bless the LORD, O my soul!
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed!
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
the earth is full of your creatures.
May the glory of the LORD endure forever
may the LORD be glad in his works!
Pleasing to him be my theme I will be glad in the LORD.
If you take away their breath, they perish
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
and you renew the face of the earth.
The fruit of the Spirit,
If you are guided by the Spirit you will be in no danger of yielding to
self-indulgence, since self-indulgence is the opposite of the Spirit, the
Spirit is totally against such a thing, and it is precisely because the two
are so opposed that you do not always carry out your good intentions.
If you are led by the Spirit, no law can touch you. When self-indulgence
is at work the results are obvious: fornication, gross indecency and
sexual irresponsibility; idolatry and sorcery; feuds and wrangling,
jealousy, bad temper and quarrels; disagreements, factions, envy;
drunkenness, orgies and similar things. I warn you now, as I warned
you before: those who behave like this will not inherit the kingdom of
God. What the Spirit brings is very different: love, joy, peace, patience,
kindness, goodness, trustfulness, gentleness and self-control. There can
be no law against things like that, of course. You cannot belong to
Christ Jesus unless you crucify all self-indulgent passions and desire.
Since the Spirit is our life, let us be directed by the Spirit.
Jesus said to his disciples: “When the Advocate comes, whom I will send to you from the Father,
the Spirit of truth who comes from the Father, he will testify on my behalf. You also are to testify
because you have been with me from the beginning.
“I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. When the Spirit of truth
comes, he will guide you into all the truth; for he will not speak on his own, but will speak whatever
he hears, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. He will glorify me, because he will
take what is mine and declare it to you. All that the Father has is mine. For this reason I said that
he will take what is mine and declare it to you.
The LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “If someone has on his skin a scab or pustule or blotch 
which appears to be the sore of leprosy, he shall be brought to Aaron, the priest,
or to one of the priests among his descendants.
If the man is leprous and unclean, the priest shall declare him unclean
by reason of the sore on his head. “The one who bears the sore of leprosy
shall keep his garments rent and his head bare, and shall muffle his beard
he shall cry out, ‘Unclean, unclean!’
As long as the sore is on him he shall declare himself unclean,since he is in fact unclean.
He shall dwell apart, making his abode outside the camp.”
I turn to you, Lord, in time of trouble, and you fill me with the joy of salvation.
Blessed is he whose fault is taken away,
whose sin is covered.
Blessed the man to whom the LORD imputes not guilt,
in whose spirit there is no guile.
Then I acknowledged my sin to you,
my guilt I covered not.
I said, “I confess my faults to the LORD,”
and you took away the guilt of my sin.
Rejoice, rejoice in the Lord,
exult, you just!
O come, ring out your joy,
all you upright of heart.
Brothers and sisters,
Whatever you eat, whatever you drink, whatever you do at all, do it for
the glory of God. Never do anything offensive to anyone – to Jews or
Greeks or to the Church of God; just as I try to be helpful to everyone at
all times, not anxious for my own advantage but for the advantage of
everybody else, so that they may be saved.
Take me for your model, as I take Christ.
A leper came to Jesus and pleaded on his knees: ‘If you want to’ he said
‘you can cure me.’ Feeling sorry for him, Jesus stretched out his hand and
touched him. ‘Of course I want to!’ he said. ‘Be cured!’ And the leprosy
left him at once and he was cured. Jesus immediately sent him away and
sternly ordered him, ‘Mind you say nothing to anyone, but go and show
yourself to the priest, and make the offering for your healing prescribed
by Moses as evidence of your recovery.’ The man went away, but then
started talking about it freely and telling the story everywhere, so that
Jesus could no longer go openly into any town, but had to stay outside in
places where nobody lived. Even so, people from all around would come
to him.
Rise up in splendor, Jerusalem!  Your light has come, the glory of the Lord shines upon you.
See, darkness covers the earth, and thick clouds cover the peoples
but upon you the LORD shines, and over you appears his glory.
Nations shall walk by your light, and kings by your shining radiance.
Raise your eyes and look about they all gather and come to you
your sons come from afar, and your daughters in the arms of their nurses.
Then you shall be radiant at what you see, your heart shall throb and overflow,
for the riches of the sea shall be emptied out before you, the wealth of nations shall be brought to you.
Caravans of camels shall fill you, dromedaries from Midian and Ephah.
all from Sheba shall come bearing gold and frankincense, and proclaiming the praises of the LORD.
Lord, every nation on earth will adore you.
O God, with your judgment endow the king,
and with your justice, the king’s son;
He shall govern your people with justice
and your afflicted ones with judgment.
Justice shall flower in his days,
and profound peace, till the moon be no more.
May he rule from sea to sea,
and from the River to the ends of the earth.
The kings of Tarshish and the Isles shall offer gifts;
the kings of Arabia and Seba shall bring tribute.
All kings shall pay him homage,
all nations shall serve him.
For he shall rescue the poor when he cries out,
and the afflicted when he has no one to help him.
He shall have pity for the lowly and the poor;
the lives of the poor he shall save.
You have heard of the stewardship of God’s grace that was given to me for your benefit, 
namely, that the mystery was made known to me by revelation.
It was not made known to people in other generations 
as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit that the Gentiles are coheirs, 
members of the same body, and copartners in the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.
When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of King Herod, 
behold, magi from the east arrived in Jerusalem, saying, 
“Where is the newborn king of the Jews? We saw his star at its rising
and have come to do him homage.”
When King Herod heard this, he was greatly troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
Assembling all the chief priests and the scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
They said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it has been written through the prophet:
And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah
since from you shall come a ruler, who is to shepherd my people Israel.”
Then Herod called the magi secretly and ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearance.
He sent them to Bethlehem and said, “Go and search diligently for the child.
When you have found him, bring me word, that I too may go and do him homage.”
After their audience with the king they set out.
And behold, the star that they had seen at its rising preceded them, 
until it came and stopped over the place where the child was.
They were overjoyed at seeing the star, 
and on entering the house
they saw the child with Mary his mother.
They prostrated themselves and did him homage.
Then they opened their treasures 
and offered him gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
And having been warned in a dream not to return to Herod, 
they departed for their country by another way.
Let me now sing of my friend,
my friend's song concerning his vineyard.
My friend had a vineyard
on a fertile hillside;
he spaded it, cleared it of stones,
and planted the choicest vines;
within it he built a watchtower,
and hewed out a wine press.
Then he looked for the crop of grapes,
but what it yielded was wild grapes.
Now, inhabitants of Jerusalem and people of Judah,
judge between me and my vineyard:
What more was there to do for my vineyard
that I had not done?
Why, when I looked for the crop of grapes,
did it bring forth wild grapes?
Now, I will let you know
what I mean to do with my vineyard:
take away its hedge, give it to grazing,
break through its wall, let it be trampled!
Yes, I will make it a ruin:
it shall not be pruned or hoed,
but overgrown with thorns and briers;
I will command the clouds
not to send rain upon it.
The vineyard of the LORD of hosts is the house of Israel,
and the people of Judah are his cherished plant;
he looked for judgment, but see, bloodshed!
for justice, but hark, the outcry!
The vineyard of the Lord is the house of Israel.
A vine from Egypt you transplanted;
you drove away the nations and planted it.
It put forth its foliage to the Sea,
its shoots as far as the River.
Why have you broken down its walls,
so that every passer-by plucks its fruit,
The boar from the forest lays it waste,
and the beasts of the field feed upon it?
Once again, O LORD of hosts,
look down from heaven, and see take care of this vine,
and protect what your right hand has planted,
the son of man whom you yourself made strong.
Then we will no more withdraw from you;
give us new life, and we will call upon your name.
O LORD, God of hosts, restore us;
if your face shine upon us, then we shall be saved.
Have no anxiety at all, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving,
make your requests known to God. Then the peace of God that surpasses all understanding
will guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. Finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, 
whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is gracious,
if there is any excellence and if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things. 
Keep on doing what you have learned and received and heard and seen in me.
Then the God of peace will be with you.
Jesus said to the chief priests and the elders of the people "Hear another parable.
There was a landowner who planted a vineyard,put a hedge around it, dug a wine press in it, 
and built a tower.Then he leased it to tenants and went on a journey. When vintage time drew near,
he sent his servants to the tenants to obtain his produce.But the tenants seized the 
servants and one they beat, another they killed, and a third they stoned.
Again he sent other servants, more numerous than the first ones, but they 
treated them in the same way.
Finally, he sent his son to them, thinking, 'They will respect my son.'
But when the tenants saw the son, they said to one another,
'This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and acquire his inheritance.'
They seized him, threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
What will the owner of the vineyard do to those tenants when he comes?"
They answered him, "He will put those wretched men to a wretched death
and lease his vineyard to other tenants who will give him the
produce at the proper times."
Jesus said to them, "Did you never read in the Scriptures
The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone
by the Lord has this been done, and it is wonderful in our eyes?
Therefore, I say to you, the kingdom of God will be taken away from you
and given to a people that will produce its fruit."
Jesus told his disciples this parable "The kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins
who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. Five of them were foolish and five were wise.
The foolish ones, when taking their lamps, brought no oil with them,
but the wise brought flasks of oil with their lamps. Since the bridegroom was long delayed,
they all became drowsy and fell asleep. At midnight, there was a cry,
'Behold, the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!' Then all those virgins got up and trimmed their lamps.
The foolish ones said to the wise,'Give us some of your oil,
for our lamps are going out.' But the wise ones replied,
'No, for there may not be enough for us and you.
Go instead to the merchants and buy some for yourselves.'
While they went off to buy it, the bridegroom came
and those who were ready went into the wedding feast with him.
Then the door was locked. Afterwards the other virgins came and said,
'Lord, Lord, open the door for us!' But he said in reply,
'Amen, I say to you, I do not know you.' Therefore, stay awake,
for you know neither the day nor the hour."
When one finds a worthy wife,
her value is far beyond pearls.
Her husband, entrusting his heart to her,
has an unfailing prize.
She brings him good, and not evil,
all the days of her life.
She obtains wool and flax
and works with loving hands.
She puts her hands to the distaff,
and her fingers ply the spindle.
She reaches out her hands to the poor,
and extends her arms to the needy.
Charm is deceptive and beauty fleeting the woman who fears the LORD is to be praised.
Give her a reward for her labors, and let her works praise her at the city gates.
Blessed are those who fear the Lord.
Blessed are you who fear the LORD,
who walk in his ways!
For you shall eat the fruit of your handiwork;
blessed shall you be, and favored.
Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine
in the recesses of your home;
Your children like olive plants
around your table.
Behold, thus is the man blessed
who fears the LORD.
The LORD bless you from Zion:
may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem
all the days of your life.
Concerning times and seasons, brothers and sisters, you have no need for anything to be written to you.
For you yourselves know very well that the day of the Lord will come like a thief at night.
When people are saying, "Peace and security, " then sudden disaster comes upon them,
like labor pains upon a pregnant woman, and they will not escape.
But you, brothers and sisters, are not in darkness, for that day to overtake you like a thief.
For all of you are children of the light and children of the day.
We are not of the night or of darkness.
Therefore, let us not sleep as the rest do, but let us stay alert and sober.
Jesus told his disciples this parable: "A man going on a journey called in his servants and entrusted his possessions to them.
To one he gave five talents; to another, two; to a third, one to each according to his ability.
Then he went away. Immediately the one who received five talents went and traded with them,
and made another five.
Likewise, the one who received two made another two.
But the man who received one went off and dug a hole in the ground and buried his master's money.
"After a long time the master of those servants came back and settled accounts with them. The one who had received five talents came 
forward bringing the additional five. He said, 'Master, you gave me five talents. See, I have made five more.'His master said to him,'
Well done, my good and faithful servant.
Since you were faithful in small matters, I will give you great responsibilities. 
Come, share your master's joy.' Then the one who had
received two talents also came forward and said,
'Master, you gave me two talents. See, I have made two more.' His master said to him, 'Well done, my good and faithful servant.
Since you were faithful in small matters, I will give you great responsibilities. Come, share your master's joy.' 
Then the one who had received the one talent came forward and said,
'Master, I knew you were a demanding person, harvesting where you did not plant and gathering where you did not scatter so out 
of fear I went off and buried your talent in the ground.
Here it is back.' His master said to him in reply, 'You wicked, lazy servant!
So you knew that I harvest where I did not plant and gather where I did not scatter?
Should you not then have put my money in the bank so that I could have got it back with interest on my return?
Now then! Take the talent from him and give it to the one with ten. For to everyone who has,  
more will be given and he will grow rich but from the one who has not,
even what he has will be taken away. And throw this useless servant into the darkness outside,
where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.'"
Thus says the Lord GOD: I myself will look after and tend my sheep. As a shepherd tends his flock when he finds himself
among his scattered sheep, so will I tend my sheep.
I will rescue them from every place where they were scattered when it was cloudy and dark. I myself will pasture my sheep I
myself will give them rest, says the Lord GOD.
The lost I will seek out, the strayed I will bring back, the injured I will bind up, the sick I will heal, but the sleek and the strong I
will destroy, shepherding them rightly.
As for you, my sheep, says the Lord GOD, I will judge between one sheep and another, between rams and goats.
The Lord is my shepherd; there is nothing I shall want.
The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want.
In verdant pastures he gives me repose.
Beside restful waters he leads me;
he refreshes my soul.
He guides me in right paths
for his name’s sake.
You spread the table before me
in the sight of my foes;
you anoint my head with oil;
my cup overflows.
Only goodness and kindness follow me
all the days of my life;
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD
for years to come.
Brothers and sisters, Christ has been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
For since death came through man, the resurrection of the dead came also through man.
For just as in Adam all die, so too in Christ shall all be brought to life, but each one in proper order: Christ the firstfruits; then, 
at his coming, those who belong to Christ; then comes the end, when he hands over the kingdom to his God and Father, 
when he has destroyed every sovereignty and every authority and power.
For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. The last enemy to be destroyed is death.
When everything is subjected to him, then the Son himself will also be subjected to the one who subjected everything to him, 
so that God may be all in all.
Jesus said to his disciples, “When the Son of Man comes in his glory, 
and all the angels with him, he will sit upon his glorious
throne, and all the nations will be assembled before him.
And he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
He will place the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
Then the king will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father. 
Inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. For I was hungry and you gave me food, 
I was thirsty and you gave me drink, a stranger and
you welcomed me, naked and you clothed me, ill and you cared for me, in prison and you visited me.’
Then the righteous will answer him and say, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry 
and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink?
When did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you? 
When did we see you ill or in prison, and visit you?
And the king will say to them in reply, ‘Amen, I say to you, whatever 
you did for one of the least brothers of mine, you did for me.’
Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, 
you accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
For I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and
you gave me no drink, a stranger and you gave me no welcome,
naked and you gave me no clothing, ill and in prison, and you did not care for me.’
Then they will answer and say, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry
 or thirsty or a stranger or naked or ill or in prison, and not
minister to your needs?’
He will answer them, ‘Amen, I say to you, what you did 
not do for one of these least ones, you did not do for me.’
And these will go off to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.”
Moses said to the people, "Ask now of the days of old, before your time,
ever since God created man upon the earth ask from one end of the sky to the other:
Did anything so great ever happen before? Was it ever heard of?
Did a people ever hear the voice of God speaking from the midst of fire, as you did, and live?
Or did any god venture to go and take a nation for himself from the midst of another nation,
by testings, by signs and wonders, by war, with strong hand and outstretched arm, and by great terrors,
all of which the Lord, your God, did for you in Egypt before your very eyes?
This is why you must now know, and fix in your heart, that the Lord is God
in the heavens above and on earth below, and that there is no other.
You must keep his statutes and commandments that I enjoin on you today,
that you and your children after you may prosper, 
and that you may have long life on the land
which the Lord, your God, is giving you forever."
Blessed the people the Lord has chosen to be his own
Upright is the word of the Lord,
and all his works are trustworthy.
He loves justice and right;
of the kindness of the Lord the earth is full.
By the word of the Lord the heavens were made;
by the breath of his mouth all their host.
For he spoke, and it was made;
he commanded, and it stood forth.
See, the eyes of the Lord are upon those who fear him,
upon those who hope for his kindness,
To deliver them from death
and preserve them in spite of famine.
Our soul waits for the Lord,
who is our help and our shield.
May your kindness, O Lord, be upon us
who have put our hope in you.
Brothers and sisters,
For those who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear,
but you received a Spirit of adoption, through whom we cry, “Abba, Father!”
The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God,
and if children, then heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ,
if only we suffer with him so that we may also be glorified with him.
The eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain to which Jesus had ordered them.
When they all saw him, they worshiped, but they doubted.
Then Jesus approached and said to them, "All power in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
Go, therefore, and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you.
And behold, I am with you always, until the end of the age."
The Lord God called to the man. ‘Where are you? he asked.
‘I heard the sound of you in the garden’ he replied, ‘I was afraid because I was naked, 
so I hid.’ ‘Who told you that you were naked?’ he asked. ‘Have you been eating of the
tree I forbade you to eat?’ The man replied, ‘It was the
woman you put with me; she gave me the fruit, and I ate it.’ Then the Lord God asked the woman,
‘What is this you have done?’ The woman replied, ‘The serpent tempted me and I ate.’
Then the Lord God said to the serpent, ‘Because you have done this, 
‘Be accursed beyond all cattle, all wild beasts. You shall crawl on your belly and eat dust every day
of your life. I will make you enemies of each other: you and
the woman, your offspring and her offspring. It will crush your head and you will strike its heel.”
With the Lord there is mercy and fullness of redemption.
Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD
LORD, hear my voice!
Let your ears be attentive to my voice in supplication.
If you, O LORD, mark iniquities, LORD,
who can stand?
But with you is forgiveness, that you may be revered.
I trust in the LORD;
my soul trusts in his word.
More than sentinels wait for the dawn,
let Israel wait for the LORD.
For with the LORD is kindness and with him is plenteous redemption
and he will redeem Israel from all their iniquities.
Brothers and sisters,
Since we have the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, 
I believed, therefore I spoke, we too believe and therefore we speak,
knowing that the one who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with Jesus
and place us with you in his presence. Everything indeed is for you,
so that the grace bestowed in abundance on more and more people
may cause the thanksgiving to overflow for the glory of God.
Therefore, we are not discouraged rather, although our outer self is wasting away,
our inner self is being renewed day by day. For this momentary light affliction
is producing for us an eternal weight of glory
beyond all comparison, as we look not to what is seen but to what is unseen;
for what is seen is transitory, but what is unseen is eternal.
For we know that if our earthly dwelling, a tent, should be destroyed,
we have a building from God, a dwelling not made with hands, eternal in heaven.
Jesus went home with his disciples, and such a crowd collected that they could not even have a meal. 
When his relatives heard of this, they set out to take charge of him,
convinced he was out of his mind. The scribes who had come down from Jerusalem
were saying, ‘Beelzebul is in him,’ and, ‘It is through the
prince of devils that he casts devils out.’ So he called
them to him and spoke to them in parables. ‘How can
Satan cast out Satan? If a kingdom is divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot last. And if a household is
divided against itself, that household can never stand.
Now if Satan has rebelled against himself and is divided,
he cannot stand either it is the end of him. But no one can make his way into a strong man’s house and burgle
his property unless he has tied up the strong man first.
Only then can he burgle his house. I tell you solemnly, all men’s sins will be
forgiven, and all their blasphemies but let anyone blaspheme against the Holy Spirit and he will never have
forgiveness he is guilty of an eternal sin.’ This was because they were saying, ‘An unclean spirit is in him.’
His mother and brothers now arrived and, standing
outside, sent in a message asking for him. A crowd was sitting
round him at the time the message was passed to him, ‘Your mother and brothers and sisters are outside asking for
you.’ He replied, ‘Who are my mother and my brothers?’
And looking round at those sitting in a circle about him, he
said, ‘Here are my mother and my brothers. 
Anyone who does the will of God, that person is my brother and sister and mother.
Moses went and told the people all the commands of the
Lord and all the ordinances. In answer, all the people said
with one voice, ‘We will observe all the commands that the
Lord has decreed.’ Moses put all the commands of the Lord
into writing, and early next morning he built an altar at the foot of the mountain, 
with twelve standing-stones for the twelve tribes of Israel. Then he directed certain young
Israelites to offer holocausts and to immolate bullocks to the
Lord as communion sacrifices. Half of the blood Moses took up and put into basins, 
the other half he cast on the altar. And taking the Book of the Covenant he read it to the listening
people, and they said, ‘We will observe all that the Lord has decreed we will obey. Then Moses took the blood and 
cast it towards the people. ‘This’ he said ‘is the blood of the 
Covenant that the Lord has made with you, containing all these rules.’
I will take the cup of salvation, and call on the name of the Lord.
How shall I make a return to the LORD for all the good he has done for me?
The cup of salvation I will take up,
and I will call upon the name of the LORD.
Precious in the eyes of the LORD is the death of his faithful ones.
I am your servant, the son of your handmaid
you have loosed my bonds.
To you will I offer sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and I will call upon the name of the LORD.
My vows to the LORD I will pay in the presence of all his people.
Brothers and sisters,
When Christ came as high priest of the good things that have come to be,
passing through the greater and more perfect tabernacle not made by hands, 
that is, not belonging to this creation, he entered once for all into the sanctuary,
not with the blood of goats and calves but with his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption.
For if the blood of goats and bulls and the sprinkling of a heifer's ashes
can sanctify those who are defiled so that their flesh is cleansed,
how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself unblemished to God,
cleanse our consciences from dead works to worship the living God.
For this reason he is mediator of a new covenant since a death has taken place for deliverance
from transgressions under the first covenant, those who are called may receive 
the promised eternal inheritance.
On the first day of Unleavened Bread, when the Passover lamb was sacrificed, his disciples
said to Jesus, ‘Where do you want us to go and make the preparations for you to eat the
passover?’ So he sent two of his disciples, saying to them, ‘Go into the city and you will
meet a man carrying a pitcher of water. Follow him, and say to the owner of the house which
he enters, “The Master says: Where is my dining room in which I can eat the passover with my
disciples?” He will show you a large upper room furnished with couches, all prepared. Make the
preparations for us there.’ The disciples set out and went to the city and found everything as he
had told them, and prepared the Passover. And as they were eating he took some bread,
and when he had said the blessing he broke it and gave it to them. ‘Take it,’ he said ‘this is
my body.’ Then he took a cup, and when he had returned thanks he gave it to them, and all
drank from it, and he said to them, ‘This is my
blood, the blood of the covenant, which is to be
poured out for many. I tell you solemnly, I shall
not drink any more wine until the day I drink the
new wine in the kingdom of God.’
After psalms had been sung they left for the Mount of Olives.
The Gospel of the Lord
Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
God did not make death,
nor does he rejoice in the destruction of the living.
For he fashioned all things that they might have being;
and the creatures of the world are wholesome,
and there is not a destructive drug among them
nor any domain of the netherworld on earth,
for justice is undying.
For God formed man to be imperishable;
the image of his own nature he made him.
But by the envy of the devil, death entered the world,
and they who belong to his company experience it.
I will praise you, Lord, for you have rescued me.
I will extol you, O LORD, for you drew me clear
and did not let my enemies rejoice over me.
O LORD, you brought me up from the netherworld;
you preserved me from among those going down into the pit.
Sing praise to the LORD, you his faithful ones, and give 
thanks to his holy name.
For his anger lasts but a moment a lifetime, his good will.
At nightfall, weeping enters in, but with the dawn, rejoicing.
Hear, O LORD, and have pity on me;
O LORD, be my helper.
You changed my mourning into dancing;
O LORD, my God, forever will I give you thanks.
Brothers and sister,
You do everything better than anyone else. You have stronger faith. You
speak and know more. You are eager to give, and you love us better. Now you must give more
generously than anyone else.
You know that our Lord Jesus Christ was kind enough to give up all his riches and become poor,
so that you could become rich.
I am not trying to make life easier for others by making life harder for you. But it is only fair for
you to share with them when you have so much, and they have so little. Later, when they have
more than enough, and you are in need, they can share with you. Then everyone will have a fair share.
As it is written, Whoever had much did not have more, and whoever had little did not have less.
Galilee
Peter
James
Jesus
Jesus got into the boat and crossed Lake Galilee. Then, as he stood on the shore, a large crowd
gathered around him. The person in charge of the Jewish meeting place was also there. His name was Jairus, 
and when he saw Jesus, he went over to him. He kneeled at Jesus feet and started begging for help. He said, “My 
daughter is about to die! Please come and touch her,
so she will get well and live!” Jesus went with Jairus. Many people followed and 
kept crowding around.
A little while later, some men came from Jairus’ home and said, “Your daughter has died! Why
bother the teacher anymore?” 
Jesus heard what they said, and he said to Jairus, “Don’t worry.
Just have faith!” Jesus did not let anyone go with him except Peter and the two brothers, James
and John. They went with Jairus and saw the people crying and making a lot of noise.
The Jesus went inside and said to them, “Why are you crying and carrying on like this? The
child is not dead. She is just asleep.” But the people laughed at him.
After Jesus had sent them all out of the house, he took the girl’s mother and father and his
three disciples and went to where she was. He took the twelve year-old girl by the hand and said,
“Talitha, koum!” which means, “Little girl, get up!” The girl got up and started walking around.
Everyone was greatly surprised. But Jesus ordered them not to tell anyone what had happened.
Then he said, “Give her something to eat.”
Job
Sea
The Lord addressed Job out of the storm and said
Who shut within doors the sea, when it burst forth from the womb 
when I made the clouds its garment and thick darkness its swaddling bands? When I set limits for it and fastened the bar of its door,
and said Thus far shall you come but no farther, 
and here shall your proud waves be stilled!
Give thanks to the Lord, his love is everlasting.
They who sailed the sea in ships,
trading on the deep waters,
These saw the works of the LORD
and his wonders in the abyss.
His command raised up a storm wind
which tossed its waves on high.
They mounted up to heaven; they sank to the depths;
their hearts melted away in their plight.
They cried to the LORD in their distress;
from their straits he rescued them,
He hushed the storm to a gentle breeze,
and the billows of the sea were stilled.
They rejoiced that they were calmed,
and he brought them to their desired haven.
Let them give thanks to the LORD for his kindness
and his wondrous deeds to the children of men.
Christ
Brothers and sisters,
We are ruled by Christ’s love for us. We are certain that if one person
died for everyone else, then all of us have died. And Christ did die for all of us. 
He died so we would no longer live for ourselves, 
but for the one who died and was raised to life for us. 
We are careful not to judge people by what they seem to be, though 
we once judged Christ in that way. Anyone who belongs to Christ is 
a new person. The past is forgotten and everything is new
On that day, as evening drew on, Jesus said to his disciples, “Let us cross 
to the other side.” Leaving the crowd, they took Jesus with them in the boat just as he was.
And other boats were with him. A violent squall came up and waves were breaking over the boat,
so that it was already filling up. Jesus was in the stern, asleep on a cushion.
They woke him and said to him, “Teacher, do you not care that we are perishing?”
He woke up, rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, “Quiet!  Be still!”
The wind ceased and there was great calm. Then he asked them, “Why are you terrified?
Do you not yet have faith?”
They were filled with great awe and said to one another,
“Who then is this whom even wind and sea obey?”
A dance performance
Single metal gong
Single metal gong
Fabric tied around the waist during funerals
Cabinet of rulers
Type of metal gong
Heavy ensemble of materials carried by the lead troh
Lone surviving twin
Harvested short ends of shrubs
Social transaction
Troh leaf
Plastic pipe used as sound instrument
War materials of a paramount chief
Hand-held ornament
Wooden drum
Masquerade dance
Necklace made of leaves
Young shoot of a palm tree
Brief ceremony to send away evil spirits
Headgear for newly enthroned chiefs
Traditional veil
Masquerade dance
Masquerade on stilts
Carrier of Mgbe masquerade
Cash appreciation
Masquerade dance
Locality
Person of the rulers of a clan
Miracle in the forest
First male child of the man
Protocol of the ruler of the clan
Marker for bereaved individuals
Performing arena in compound
Locality
Tall drum
Mask headgear
German's head (Gustav Conrau)
Palm fronds to enclose areas
Rattles
Singers
Paramount rulers
Noblemen
Herbs for fons and chiefs
Locality
Brass dancing bells
Camwood
Masquerade with a large bell
Twin children
Tree whose fruits are used to make dancing rattles
Place where children come from
Money tied with the bark of a banana stem
Masquerade
Earth-mother cult
Friend
Young shoot of palm frond
Name of locality
Chief
Paramount ruler
Prince/princess from the atemangwat paternal family
chiefs who became subdued and therefore became answerable to a paramount ruler
largest metal gong in lefem grove
a place of sacrifice and worship of God for Nweh people
dressed and decorated space for chiefs to sit
a performance that ushers in a paramount chief into a celebration ground
handheld (single) metal gong
masquerade
small drum about 60cm
metal ankle bracelet for chiefs’ wives
an exclusive special dance by the wives of fon or chief
hand-held double metal gong
secret grove where the troh society resides
intermediary song during a dance performance, during which there is no dancing
a masquerade dance
a rope that is tied as a bundle which represents a promissory note for a goat
meeting house in a palace
a peer group organisation or movement grouping people of the same age group or social ranking for self-sustenance
masquerade dance
friendship
pray God and bless the land
horse tail used as a dancing prop
female close assistant to the chief
masquerade dance
a masquerade dance performance
staff or walking stick
a plant leaf for troh (Piper auritum or sacred pepper)
a herbal medicinal concoction used to embalm newly enthroned notables
white chalk
costume for masquerade
divine beauty
something that calms down evil spirits
a particular masquerade dance performance
a particular masquerade dance performance
name of locality
name of locality
to sleep over night at a funeral
a masquerade
traditional royal fabric
a locality in Nweh
upper limits of the entrance to a compound
dancing foot wear – ankle rattles
lair
type of drum
space (house) reserved for masquerades
main parlour or house of a homestead
drinking cup
mixture of herbs for spiritual cleansing (Christian communion?)
the tuber of yam seedling to be planted
type of drum, about 80cm height
dance machete
a particular dance performance
a locality in Essoh Attah
noble and stylish dance for the wealthy
‘gun’ - rugged walking stick for troh
wooden xylophone
type of metal gong that accompanies a fon
name of a locality
a locality
special performance to send off a deceased person’s spirit
a variety of stilt masquerade
notable
civilian leader and commander of the troh
Dracaena Fragans (a special green plant, used for official ceremonies)
a very large and almost immovable wooden drum
part of the house or veranda, or in lemoo where the chief or senior persons in the family sit
special performance apparatus used to announce the opening of dance performances during a funeral
a place at the palace gate where bekems leave their caps, a stick is usually pinned to the ground for that purpose
a masquerade dance performance
one of the persons of the rulers of a clan. This is the traditional prime minister of the clan
type of drum
the dress for a masquerade
ebony wood
a room reserved for eating and drinking during funerals
a marker of the Ntang
slit drum
log drum
main earth mother dance performance of Nweh people
name of locality
appellation of the people and their language
white spiritual powder
the middle drum of Nweh threesome drum about 70cm
a dance headgear
mourning basket - normally it is a basket of raw food or cooked food. Today it may be converted to cash gifts
basket of food items and drinks used as a prop for funeral ceremonies
sound made by troh during their performance
The Lord is my shepherd there is nothing I shall want.
The LORD is my shepherd I shall not want.
In verdant pastures he gives me repose;
beside restful waters he leads me;
he refreshes my soul.
He guides me in right paths
for his name's sake.
Even though I walk in the dark valley
I fear no evil for you are at my side
with your rod and your staff that give me courage.
You spread the table before me
in the sight of my foes;
you anoint my head with oil
my cup overflows.
Only goodness and kindness follow me
all the days of my life
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD
for years to come.
ask
arrange
answer
adjust
add
assist
calculate
call
change
check
clean
choose
close
complete
construct
delete
describe
direct
distribute
document
educate
explain
follow
form
give
help
increase
inform
keep
learn
list
locate
measure
open
organize
outline
plan
purchase
quantify
read
reduce
reflect
refuse
register
remove
repair
report
request
research
resolve
respond
search
select
send
share
sign
start
stop
support
take
translate
understand
watch
write
accept
account
appear
arrive
benefit
build
comfort
complete
conclude
create
draw
drive