a kɛ̀' tè bɔ̀ŋ.	it was not good in the morning.
fʉ̀'ɔ mbieb ndùŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀.	come and keep guard over this poached rat.
ŋ́nyik ndɔŋ jɛ, é lwɔ tɛ nǎ nkwita 	my cup overflows.
jisɔs ŋ́ soŋ a gi enənyə nchɛm. jisɔs a lyɔ á mbó jɨ nghə, “ŋwɔ ́gɛ, le bɛm-ndɛm go a ghə mə ́go tyɔ.́ ghɔ ́mə́bware, ngəʼ jo é mě.”	jesus heard what they said, and he said to jairus, “don’t worry.
mèsɔ̀ŋ e leih bì ar ncù yèh tɛ̀ mmè.	all his teeth are decayed.
kwi'á	add
é chɨ gi nza za a lɔk gini.	in accord with the riches of his grace that he lavished upon us. 
byɔ le juʼu, te bap bɔ́n jyɔ, ŋ ghə. byɔ ghə bap, mbɛ̂ ndɛm mbware a bə́ mə́ byɔ.	then the god of peace will be with you.
mə le, ngɔŋ bimɔʼ byɔ é gɛ jale, byɔ bə ́á nyɛ ́ngəʼ bɔ.́ ŋ dyɔ mə ́le, tenduri ebuŋ	so that you could become rich.
a le bin nchɛʼɛ aruli za á kɛbe atsa-ndya. 	the stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone
go tɔŋ salaka á mbó mə	you spread the table before me
jɛʼ tǒ gi é zɔ̌á ntenchɔʼ myɛ lebe isrɛ, nza le á tsɔ́é fya etǎ, é chɛʼ myɛ sɛda enɛtnɛt bənya é ŋaŋa lechɛŋ. enɛt-nɛt bəsəŋ é kwɛt məndya map á nyɛ́mbo tʉ̌júnɛ́é	they that are planted in the house of the lord
o se mbɔ̀ɔ̀ bendrɔh.	you are spreading out clothes for them to get dry.
bó chɔʼ nghə, “a gɔ̌bəgaŋ-sɔ júnɛ́é zɔ, é bin ́ nfya ana bətʉ̌van á mbó byɔ bəjɨʼɔ, ébî eləŋ	they answered him, "he will put those wretched men to a wretched death
á bap, emɨk achyɛ́-byɔ é nyɛ́byɔ bi é bɔgɔ gi,	see, the eyes of the lord are upon those who fear him,
le tɔ́ŋ	read
amaya mgbê	carrier of mgbe masquerade
achyɛ́-byɔ ndɛm gɛ, lefaŋ lo é chyɛ́,	o lord, my god, you are great indeed!
akano ŋ́ chɛla jisɔs gi a lǎ kwɔ mə́ tɛ́ ŋáŋá ntí bó ma bó ghɔ. emɔʼ ekano sá é lǎ	and other boats were with him. a violent squall came up and waves were breaking over the boat,
a se mbə etyɔ́gɛ, a te lefɛ bɔŋ.	this is how it is with the kingdom of god it is as if a man were to scatter seed on the land
ŋwɔ gi a bɔŋ bətɔsɛn ́ legɛm. a le, byɔ bi é bɔŋ, b ́ ə́kwiʼi á gap bó bɔŋ tenduri. byɔ ́ bi	more will be given and he will grow rich but from the one who has not,
mbem	to accept
eləŋ gî krist a le fʉʼʉ bɛʼ nkɛm-ndɛm-ndî bənu mbɔŋ, a le kwɔ́ ntí myɛ́	when christ came as high priest of the good things that have come to be,
esa go é lɛ̌á mbó bʉk, bʉk kwɛle	if your face shine upon us, then we shall be saved.
bənu mi nyɛt kɔ́ŋ é lɛ́té, ŋ́ bə́ bənu bɛʼ, le jǎ esɔ́, bɛʼ le ghə bɛnu mi é te lɛ́, bɛʼ le	if you are led by the spirit, no law can touch you. when self-indulgence
akèndɔ̀ŋ-à-bàŋŋ a ta gap bɔ̀ŋ.	they don't like ripe plaintain.
é lǎ eləŋ mě, jisɔs a lyɔ á mbó achɛʼɛka ŋwɔnyɔŋ nghə, “lefwɔ ndɛm é bɛ́ʼ ŋwɔ	or what parable can we use for it?
emɔʼ byɔ é lɔgɔ myɛ́akano ncho nghɔ má alɛʼɛ-alɛʼɛ ntsa. bó le ghɔ á ntaŋ	they who sailed the sea in ships,
gitá	describe
lekɔɔ	a rope that is tied as a bundle which represents a promissory note for a goat
gɛ, byɔ ta gɛ ebuŋ le dʉ́fya, ntí gɛ é na nfʉ́, byɔ ta gɛ ntsa le nó fya. ‘ŋ dɛ nghɔ-ŋwɔ,	for i was hungry and you gave me no food, i was thirsty and
ò ba'-te atu jeh.	you will plait my hair.
à gɔ̀ ntsèà mbòŋ.	he was stirred the water and turned it dirty.
le juʼɔ gɛ, tɛ́mbyɔ techoŋɔ. byɔ júnɛ́sá é la ta gɛ guʼte, ŋ́ bin za ntyɔ́atú.	but you shall say to them: thus says the lord god!
le kwɔ	arrive
biɔ̀h kei no -oo?	have you people drunk it?
biɔ̀h no mʉʉ lε ?	have you people drunk it?
lemô	meeting house in a palace
ŋwɔ gi fwɛt-fwɛt gi á ta anu le fʉli za	in whose spirit there is no guile.
nɛt, bó ma bimɔʼ bənu te bɔ́ŋ. ŋ shwɔʼɔ gwɔ bɛʼ ŋ dɛ̌ ji mə́ nshuʼɔ gwɔ nghə nkó	jealousy, bad temper and quarrels; disagreements, factions, envy;
bedimba	singers
bó le bin nkwɛ́ lekwɛ á mbó ndɛm, ŋ́ kɔʼ nghɔ mə́ lebe olif. 	after psalms had been sung they left for the mount of olives.
a le, ŋwɔ gi a bɔgɔ achyɛ-́byɔ	behold, thus is the man blessed
a le ghə takəkə, le é bə́ngɔŋ,	for he fashioned all things that they might have being;
tey bə' njiɔ.	let us break it and see.
a se mbə ndya byɔ isrɛ bó byɔ juda,	the vineyard of the lord of hosts is the house of israel,
jems	james
bənyɛt map, mbɛ̂ achɛna-ndya júnɛ́ a tɛgɛ. satan é gap nyɛt á nyɛ́ mənkó ŋ́ ná	now if satan has rebelled against himself and is divided,
bəvɛt nkɛʼ á ntí átúʼ. tangwinghɔ a lɛn a le fʉ́ʼ, bó ji le ŋiʼ ŋ́guʼ lelɔk.	but the wise brought flasks of oil with their lamps. since the bridegroom was long delayed,
m bem-mm?	should i agree?
atúkúŋ	mask headgear
mpe	to sleep over night at a funeral
é bin kɛm akě za ŋ de bɔ̌ndɔk ngabe, nza lě bó gina ntí	break through its wall, let it be trampled!
go, a le chɨ byɔnyɔŋ le go tyɔ́ mə́, go bin nghɔ ŋ́ fya amɛʼ á mbó ndɛm bɛʼ	by moses as evidence of your recovery.’ the man went away, but then
pia à leih bàŋ tε mbʉg.	the avocado got ripe before getting bad.
nchɛm ŋ́ fʉ́ʼɔ á njyɔ́ jɨ.	to him.
mba'	to entwine a rope
hɛrɔt a le tɔŋ bəghɔ bi é lé fə́á nghásyá ŋ́za anu ndɔk ndate bəsaŋ é fʉ́ʼ, bó ma bó	after their audience with the king they set out.
fwa-ntə́ʼ	chiefs who became subdued and therefore became answerable to a paramount ruler
à kei nəŋ -ŋŋ ?	has he/she allowed it?
à nəŋ mʉʉ lε ?	has he/she allowed it?
ǹtǝ'	slit drum
aleʼ zǎ achyɛ́-byɔ a ghə, á jyɔ, ntí bəbyɔ é lɛ̌, ŋ́ mbin bɔ́ŋ lekak	everyone who believes that jesus is the christ is begotten by god, and everyone who loves the father loves also the one begotten by him.
amɔʼ afú te bɔŋ za á á nyɛ́bo, á te bə	and there is not a destructive drug among them
èmik e bii ar atu mə̀ŋ.	i have become blind.
bòggò e ba	you and i cover
“tɛn le kwak!” afɛ́m a le jɛ́ʼɛ́, alɛʼ a nɔ́ŋ le kwaaak. jisɔs a bin ndyɔ á mbó bajiʼi	do you not yet have faith?”
á jɛrosalɛm. bó le toŋte nghə, “ŋwɔ́gi bə́zɔ, égî á b ́ ə́fwɔ bə-juw á fɔ?́ ́bʉ́k jyɔ saŋ	“where is the newborn king of the jews? we saw his star at its rising
krist	christ
à boŋŋ àzem mìì à gʉ̀-ʉ.	he lacks what to do.
bó kɔ́ŋtá achyɛ́-byɔ á nyɛ́bəcha mi a bɔ́ŋ,	let them give thanks to the lord for his kindness
gi á nkɛm-ndɛm.	if the man is leprous and unclean, the priest shall declare him unclean
le lɛt á se	register
à bə̀ be -ee?	can he/she pick it?
é ji mbə le bəbyɔ é ləŋə, te bap bɔ́ á bě, mbɛ̂ bə́bɔ́ŋɔ́le ghə bənu mi achyɛ́-byɔ	and when the grain is ripe, he wields the sickle at once, for the harvest has come.”
“bó chɔʼ nghə, ‘achyɛ-́byɔ, bʉ́k le jyɔ́go eləŋə kɔ, nji nǎ nkǒ á go, ké ntí go n ́ ǎ nfʉ̌,	then they will answer and say, ‘lord, when did we see you hungry
bɔ́ŋ bəmyɛ́bəna, bó ma bəndya, é le fîn, ndɔk nkáp za bó fîn ŋ́ nfʉ́ʼ	his mercy endures forever.”
á kɔŋ. a le bəbyɔ bəchɛm é tɛna á nzɔ krist, a sɛʼɛ bəbyɔ. bə́ chɔʼ ŋwɔnchɛm á nyɛ́	he said,
etyɔ́gi é ntí təŋa-mɔʼk é te ngɔŋ bɔ́,	nor any domain of the netherworld on earth,
mbieb	to protect
gî bó le jyɔ saŋ júnɛ, bó le bô nkak. bó le kw ́ ɔ́á ndya fə́, ŋ́jyɔ ŋwɔ́bó amɛ̂gi mɛri.	they prostrated themselves and did him homage.
le lɛt	write
á nzɔ́ jɨ, á gaba gap elɨʼ bya bɛʼ mbyɛp-ebuŋ-nkrə́ a na ntɛʼɛ mənjɨ ŋ́turi á nyɛ́	and he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
nale á mbó nkó, bó fə á nyɛ́bənu mi təgwəgwə a bɔ́ŋ, ŋ́ gapte nkáp.	let the house of aaron say,
le ji'	educate
chɨta	check
mbɔ̀ŋ	to be handsome
mbɔg.	to dread
nfya bəbyɔ. a chɨ ma bəbyɔ eza gi, bó ma bənu mi a le ně ntí jɨ, émî a le fə́ á nyɛ́	we who first hoped in christ. 
ndya erɔn é lyɔ lě, “a bɔ́ŋ bəcha eləŋ nchɛm”	let those who fear the lord say,
́le bɔ	construct
bó la bə-juw, ébî é le nâ ŋáŋa a jɛrosalɛm, mbə byɔ ndɛm, ébî é le fə́ á nyɛ́	now there were devout jews from every nation under heaven staying in jerusalem.
é fʉʼɔ á mbó go. techi ngɔŋ a fʉʼɔ á mbó go. tenturi bənya mi bə́tɔ́ŋ le	for the riches of the sea shall be emptied out before you, the wealth of nations shall be brought to you.
mbə 	to be
àkàka	cocoa
mbete	recount a story
fɛt mǎ atá-tʉ̌za ŋ de ghə go bɛʼ lɛʼ nfɛt kɔ́?” adam a ghə, “mengwi gi go le fya	tree i forbade you to eat?’ the man replied, ‘it was the
nkɔŋ bó le bɛm ndɛm é buŋte	with every spiritual blessing in the heavens, as he chose us in him, before the foundation of the world,
bɔŋ, a ghə byɔ bɔŋ ebuŋ bi, byɔ se nkɔŋɔ. a bə ́bap, ŋwɔnchɛm á bə ndəŋ-ndəŋ,	you to share with them when you have so much, and they have so little. later, when they have
fɔ́? a lɔk é gwɔ enɛt ezá fɔ́? byɔ jyɔ bəmyɛ́ bənu mi a lɔk mbo mi nghə! a te nkɔ̂-	what mighty deeds are wrought by his hands! is he not the carpenter, the son of mary,
byɔ bi é bɔgɔ achyɛ́-byɔ é lyɔ lě, “a bɔ́ŋ bəcha eləŋ nchɛm”	his mercy endures forever.”
a brə-ə.	it will get missing.
é ŋáŋ abó-luŋ jɨ nghə, ‘byɔ bi mbê gɛ a fya mə́mbware é fʉʼ! byɔ fʉ́ʼ ŋ́kwɔ lefwɔ ra	then the king will say to those on his right, ‘come, you who are blessed by my father. 
à bieb-e.	he will watch.
o se mbɔ̀ɔ̀ bendrɔh bɔ̀ɔ.	you are spreading out clothes continuously.
ò kei mìn -nn? 	have you pressed it?
àtàp	marker for bereaved individuals
ŋ jɨ gin má ntí fǒ fi legʉ́mə, mbɛ̂ŋ te bɔk elɨʼ bɔ́	even though i walk in the dark valley
ci'tà m bə̀ŋ.	let me lick it.
à lε' -ε e baŋ-ŋ.	he/she will faint someday.
jʉh lèh bemm lɛ̀?	did he/she agree?
ko	take
le kwi	take
m be atʉ ŋwat mbə'te ŋgwa'.	let me take that stick, break into pieces and throw away.
ǹtsèà e ndiah fɔ̀ -ɔ̀ɔ̀ ? 	is there water in this house?
“fwɔ chɔʼ́ɔ́á mbó bó ghə̌, ‘ŋ soŋɔ gwɔ enənyə, takəkə gi go ghə á mbó amɔʼ ŋwɔ gi	and the king will say to them in reply, ‘amen, i say to you, whatever 
le lyɔ bap, jisɔs a bin tɔŋɔ gap nghə bó fʉʼ, a bin ndɔk ngɛ ŋ́ soŋɔ á mbó bó nghə,	satan cast out satan? if a kingdom is divided against
jɨ. techi júnɛ́a la gol, bó elee, ma alabinda za bə́tɔŋ le mɛr, ébî bó le fya á mbó jɨ.	and offered him gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
abúʼ	fabric tied around the waist during funerals
ləŋə-ləŋə gɛ a chɛŋə achyɛ́-byɔ, tɛ́á chya bɛʼ babyɛp elɨʼ,	my soul trusts in his word.
kɛpté	dressed and decorated space for chiefs to sit
ŋ dyɔ le, “ŋ bɛm bəsɔ mə á mbó achyɛ́-byɔ.”	i said, “i confess my faults to the lord,”
ncù-ndiah wùɔ̀ e bale ar eseh.	this door is low.
biɔ̀h e ba	you people cover
bangwi júnɛ́legɛm é le lǒ ase ŋ́gwaʼé məkrə-nkɛʼ map. bi le fúlí, é lyɔ́á mbó bi é le	'behold, the bridegroom! come out to meet him!' then all those virgins got up and trimmed their lamps.
le kap é kuʼu, bó fya ébî ebuŋ.”	and lease his vineyard to other tenants who will give him the
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a lò-u e bag-a.	this plantain will get sour tomorrow.
ŋ́ mbə bə-juw, ma byɔ bi te bə-jew bɔ́, ébî é bwɛre ŋ́ kwɔ emɔʼ ekuŋ-ndɛm, égî	as well as travelers from rome,
bó le bɔ́ŋ, a lǎ mə́za nkó . bəkɛm jisɔs é le lɔk myɛ́etyɔ́, ŋ́ soŋ bɛʼ bó	there was no needy person among them, for those who owned property or houses would sell them, bring the proceeds of the sale,
ŋ́chɨ gɛ kwɛʼ nza	for his name’s sake.
massɛ́m	a masquerade dance performance
ǹ temm a nyà	i shoot.
nɔ̀	i shoot.
mbieb	to guard
go kě mbin mbɔŋ bəcha nza lě bə guʼta go	but with you is forgiveness, that you may be revered.
gò bə̀ tè bem, ŋ̀ gwè à go.	if you don't admit it, i deal with you.
a bieb mʉʉ.	he has watched it.
enənyə le, bənu mbɔ́ŋ é zɔla gɛ ŋ bɔ́ŋ bəcha	only goodness and kindness follow me
ntaŋ	a room reserved for eating and drinking during funerals
ebuŋ nchɛm bi ndɛm a ghə, é kuʼ le ŋaŋ ngɔŋ,	and the creatures of the world are wholesome,
ò kein ntem a nɔ̀ mee lε? 	did you shoot that animal in the morning?
le ji'i	learn
bìɔ̀h bàle meneit miɔh imbà!	the way you people hate each other is too much.
à kei bìg.	he has arrived first.
ntí, anuza bó le nǎ mbɔ́gɔ́ bəmyɛ́-byɔ bə-juw. jisɔs a bin nfʉ́ʼ ŋ́ tɛn atétsá bó nghə,	thomas, called didymus, one of the twelve, was not with them when jesus came.
achyɛ́-byɔ mə ndyɔ, ŋ ghə bap.”	brothers and sisters,
jʉh bate a geh.	he is my close follower.
bɔ̀' belù' mʉ̀ɔ̀ ar ntih fɔ̀h.	pour this wine in here.
legɔlyɔ gi a te ŋáŋ bɔ́, a lɔgɔ bəbyɔ é myɛ́ bəguʼ gi a te lɛʼ mě bɔ́ é fʉʼʉ é chya ŋwɔ́	our inner self is being renewed day by day. for this momentary light affliction
gɛ a gwɔ? bəchɛʼnjɛm bɛ é má gwɔ?”	you.’ he replied, ‘who are my mother and my brothers?’
mbə 	to exist
kɔ́ŋ a le juʼ á mbó byɔ bɔ́, byɔ buʼ abɛp a bəku byɔ ŋ́ do fə́. byɔ lɔk bap é chɨ le	the twelve drove out many demons, and they anointed with oil many who were sick and cured them.
zɔle, bɛʼ le kaŋa ajɛma ŋwɔ, bɛʼ le nó bəluʼ mbya, bɛʼ le nó bəluʼ á nkó ŋ́ jǎ legi te	sexual irresponsibility; idolatry and sorcery; feuds and wrangling,
à wɔ se mbagla elʉ̀' -ʉʉ?	who is making that clatter of noise?
enənyə á nyɛ́ŋwɔ̌nkap, ŋ bin fya go za njǎ. f́ʉ́ʼɔ té kak!’	'master, i knew you were a demanding person, harvesting where you did not plant and gathering where you did not scatter so out 
eləŋ gî bó ma fwɔ é le soŋə ndó, bó le ji le ghɔ. saŋ gî bó le tɛn á ngháshyá ́ ŋ́jyɔ a	and on entering the house
à lò-u e bə-ə er fəah.	he will be there tomorrow.
te bɔ́ŋ á nyɛ́ jɨ.” amɛ̂ gi, bó ma bəchɛʼnjɛm bi é le fʉ́ʼʉ́ á njyɔ jɨ. bó le tɛna abe ŋ́	his mother and brothers now arrived and, standing
baba mfia a geh tesa.	trim and give me the pair of scissors.
mboŋ.	to want
mey kei bə'te mbo moh ai?	have your hands been broken?
bey bə'te mʉʉ = mbo moh ai?	have your hands been broken?
a kei bɔ̀ŋ -ŋŋ ?	is it okay?
a bɔ̀ŋ mʉʉ lε ?	is it okay?
mvɛn te bɔŋ́ , bó ma bənjɔŋ é tsɔ́ntí ana fə́.	it shall not be pruned or hoed,
ndɛm gî a le bʉʼə achyɛ́-byɔ jisɔs á nyɛ́ legʉ́, a bʉʼɔ bəbyɔ má jisɔs sá, é bʉʼɔ gwɔ	knowing that the one who raised the lord jesus will raise us also with jesus
o kuɔ njwàre beci'nzèm boh.	when you arrive, greet your younger ones.
akɔ zìàà a bitlà là -àà?	what has just exploded like that?
ebwɔ-betat,	brothers and sisters,
fʉ̀'ɔ nnà mbabta emɔk wùɔ̀ e bà' tùɔ̀ mbàp jʉ̀ɔ̀.	come and be looking after this fire let it not burn this meat.
enənyə á bə́á nyɛ́eləŋ lefwɔ ra	justice shall flower in his days,
“jyɔ, amɛ̂ go bó bəchɛʼnjɛm bó é tɛn abé ŋ́ na fɛ́ʼɛ́ go.” jisɔs a chɔʼ nghə, “amɛ̂	round him at the time the message was passed to him, ‘your mother and brothers and sisters are outside asking for
mbòŋte.	to bewilder
ngɛmaka	type of drum, about 80cm height
emɔʼ byɔ é lɛʼ juʼ nzá ndɛm ézâ é fə́á ntí mɔk, ŋ́ za bila á ngɔŋ ŋaŋ kɔ́? kě	by testings, by signs and wonders, by war, with strong hand and outstretched arm, and by great terrors,
á ntí ndya go,	in the recesses of your home;
má nkəʼte bənu mi a ghə á mbó ewɔŋkə byɔnyɔŋ.	and his wondrous deeds to the children of men.
le jɨ	start
e se mbrəə.	it is quenching.
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a leih bag.	this plantain got sour a long time ago.
á tetsa bəgaŋ mbwɔ mɛ	in the sight of my foes;
fya gʉk ngɔŋ za bʉk lɔk tɔŋ lelɛn lo	give us new life, and we will call upon your name.
achyɛ́-byɔ a le fə́á ntí myɛ́afɛm, ŋ́ chɔʼɔ asoŋɔ jɔp.	sea
mbrɔ̀gle	to stir.
a brəə.	it got missing.
ŋ fya alwɔ etyɔ,́	but overgrown with thorns and briers;
bə̀ŋə!	lick it!
ŋ juʼɔ ajɛm za ndɛm achyɛ́-byɔ a lyɔ,	truth shall spring out of the earth, and justice shall look down from heaven.
bieb abɔ̀ɔ̀ joh.	guard your bag.
a le lɔk ndǎ ebuŋ a nyótá lékák lé-jiʼi, bajiʼi á mbó jisɔs é chɛmta gi nghə, “go se	said to jesus, ‘where do you want us to go and make the preparations for you to eat the
le tɛn ndəŋ-ndəŋ á zɔ ndɛm a te lɛʼ mě bɔ́	for justice is undying.
mbə̀glea	to stir
bó le jyɔ bəmyɛ́bənu mi achyɛ́-byɔ a ghə,	these saw the works of the lord
le turí	reduce
bekɛm	noblemen
eləŋ nchɛm 	for years to come.
ngaŋ ana á gwɔ. byɔ fʉ́ʼ, bəbyɔ zɔ́gi, nza le bəbyɔ dʉ́techi gi.’ bó gɔ̌gi á ntí ana bətʉ̌van, ŋ́	but when the tenants saw the son, they said to one another,
àkèndɔ̀ŋ a kei bàŋ.	the plantain is ripe
àkèndɔ̀ŋ a bàŋ mʉʉ.	the plantain is ripe
àkèndɔ̀ŋ a bàŋŋ.	the plantain is ripe
bɛʼ babyɛp elɨʼ, é chə́ŋə́lé nzɔ lɛ, byɔ isrɛ é se chəŋə achyɛ́-byɔ.	let israel wait for the lord.
à hʉ̀ə̀ mbe ò nəŋ a lɔ̀g ŋgʉ̀ɔ.	if he happens to pick it later on in the day, you allow him/her to go with it.
à lò-u e bieb-e a go.	he will guard you tomorrow.
ŋ́chɨ gɛ nza mbɔ́ŋ	for his name's sake.
ndɛm gî a fya ngɔŋ?	cleanse our consciences from dead works to worship the living god.
jiɔ a geh a le be.	look at how i pick it.
à lòò ar mbieba.	he is just from watching/guarding it.
ò kein na mbə̀ŋta.	you were licking it repeatedly in the morning.
ewɔŋkə eləŋ zɔgɔ, ébî é jyɔ mə́nkɛʼ. bəbyɔ é te mə byɔ ntí-ntrɔʼ bɔ, te bap b ́ ɔ́byɔ ntí	for all of you are children of the light and children of the day.
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a lèh na mbaga.	this plantain was getting sour.
mi é te tyɔ́ le zɔle bɔ́.	his is the one who came through water and blood, jesus christ, not by water alone, but by water and blood. the spirit is the one that testifies, and the spirit is truth.
gò bɔŋ ŋkap njuɔ tècìyì tèbetu.	when you have money, you buy useless things.
nkɔŋ za bó bəcha mi é saŋa ngɔŋ.	of the kindness of the lord the earth is full.
ndyá-ndî	main parlour or house of a homestead
ò bem bab -ee?	do you agree to that?
ŋ́zɔ́kwɛʼ bətʉ̌van mi a le tɛʼɛ a mə.	he spaded it, cleared it of stones,
à kèh binn lèbin mɔ' mbɔ̀ŋ a geh tàà'.	i enjoyed his dancing style a lot.
abé bətɔsɛn bətɛ̂mi le kwiʼi nghə, ‘myɛ-́ŋwɔ, go le fya gɛ nkap bətɔsɛn betɛ̌, ŋ bin	since you were faithful in small matters, i will give you great responsibilities. 
bəfwɔ nchɛm é ŋwaʼa se á nzɔ jɨ é shyɛ́la gi	all kings shall pay him homage,
à lèh bəŋte ar eseh.	he rolled on the ground the day before yesterday.
“ŋ soŋɔ gwɔ enənyə nghə, ndɛm a bə cha bəsɔ nchɛm mi byɔnyɔŋ ghə, bó ma	only then can he burgle his house. i tell you solemnly, all men’s sins will be
mbàb	blindfold 
nyɛ jɨ. a bɔ́ŋɔ gwɔ-kap, á ŋaŋa zá lɨʼ jɨlejɨ, a ŋaŋa abe.	he shall dwell apart, making his abode outside the camp.”
ò bɔ̀ŋŋ a geh.	you please me.
ǹ tei bə'-ə bɔ.	i will not break it.
lɔgɔ atú jyɔ, ŋ́ chɛʼ mboŋ, nzale é mboŋ za é ghə, byɔ chɛʼ bəgaŋ nkap. ŋ ta ndyɔ	you know that our lord jesus christ was kind enough to give up all his riches and become poor,
mbàle	to hate each other
mbab	trim hair
ewɔŋkə ndɛm. eləŋ gi bəbyɔ le ghə, “mbê gɛ! mbê gɛ!” fwɛt-fwɛt-ndɛm bó fwɛt	but you received a spirit of adoption, through whom we cry, “abba, father!”
nvɛn za a lɔgɔ gɛ nghɔ mə, élê ŋ jɨté, é ŋwété, ŋ́mbwate	in verdant pastures he gives me repose.
mə́achyɛ́-byɔ, ŋ tuŋɔ go á mbó bó, élê go chɨ gap nkrɔ gwɔ. bó kɔŋɔ bó juʼ,	and whether they heed or resist for they are a rebellious house—
bəchɛm é kwi nó. jisɔs a bin ghə, “ali jɛ a jyɔ, ézǎ ŋ sáŋ átú byɔnyɔŋ. ŋ soŋɔ	not drink any more wine until the day i drink the
a ijip, ma bimɔʼ ebɛk-elɛʼ mi a libya, éfî a kuŋte sirin. emɔʼ nkó bəbyɔ é fə́ a rom,	pontus and asia, phrygia and pamphylia, egypt and the districts of libya near cyrene,
à brɔgle enti gih.	he has cooled his temper.
 ngwi go a bɛʼ atʉ́van za a fya etǎ mbɔŋ́	your wife shall be like a fruitful vine
a brə̀ə̀, ò jiɔ à geh!	if it gets missing, i deal with you.
fwa-nkhəŋgê	prince/princess from the atemangwat paternal family
le jii mɔ̀ˈfi nsaŋe tɛɛ mbʉ̀ɔ legɛm	counting from one to ten in nweh
a le fʉʼɔ a tetsa ana, ŋ́mbɔ ŋwɔ-́ndya gi a sɛgɛ tʉ̌,	and planted the choicest vines;
à bem mʉʉ lε?	has he/she addmitted?
m bem-mm?	should i accept?
esebeli	masquerade
mbɔ̀ŋ	to be nice
gò bàb ebuaŋkə tàà.	you like cheating children a lot.
tɔgɔ ntye ba'à mbete ba' a kein ntɔg bub mey ju'.	pass and stand here and narrate the story how it happened.
nyǐ	dance machete
nchɨ-nkrɔ-ndɛm a le lɛtle le,	since from you shall come a ruler, who is to shepherd my people israel.”
chɨ gap á le zɔle mbyɔ nchɛm mi ŋ fya á mbó byɔ. mə tetsa byɔ eləŋ nchɛm,	teaching them to observe all that i have commanded you.
za a le ghə, ebuŋ nchɛm mi é lebu bó ese, mə́ krist bɛʼ ŋwɔ gi a tɛn nzɔ é ləŋte.	the gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him, were sealed with the promised holy spirit,
à lò-u e brə̀-ə.	it will get rotten tomorrow.
ma le bə ga go guʼte é lwɔ́ntí gwʉk	with the mockery of the arrogant,with the contempt of the proud.
ra mə, bɛʼ a le tɛʼɛ bəbyɔ á le bə́ byɔ bi tɛ́ ngɔŋ ji, élê bəbyɔ é lɛ̌ á nzɔ jɨ, mbə te	that he set forth in him as a plan for the fullness of times,
à kɛ̀' nna mbata à go.	he was looking for you this morning .
esa á ntí bəmyɛ́ntsa.	trading on the deep waters,
bendrɔh.	clothes
aluŋ	traditional veil
mba'	to plait hair
ŋ́ na ndoŋta ngɔŋ. a le kwɔ ndya, ŋ́ dyɔ á mbó bó nghə, “emyɔ betabe é bi kɔ?́ byɔ se ndɛ ̂a kɔ?́ ŋwɔ ́gwɔ a ke kʉ́, a se ndé elě!” bó le juʼ bap ngwi gi, jisɔs a bin chɨ nghə bó bəchɛm é tuŋ ma bé. a lɔk a mbê ma ŋwɔ ́bó amɛ ̂gi, ma bajiʼi á mbó	after jesus had sent them all out of the house, he took the girl’s mother and father and his
a fəa e brə̀-ə.	it will one day get rotten.
à kèh zogo mbìàŋta leliŋ loh.	he was backbiting your name yesterday.
mbà	to detest
mbɛ̀	to detest
ma achyɛ́-byɔ á nyɛ́enənyə go gi go lɔk mbyɛba gwʉk ntitrɔʼ.	therefore, we aspire to please him,
sá byɔ ghɔ ŋ́ chɛla gi. bə́ lɔk má atú jyɔ ŋ́ ghə bənu myɔ nchɛm, nza lě bɛʼ mbware	and place us with you in his presence. everything indeed is for you,
ò babtà ò tè jiɔ̀, ò nəŋ.	if you look for it and can't find it, allow it.
mbiaŋte	be thriftless
ana bətʉ̌van za abó-luŋɔ jo a le zɔ́	the son of man whom you yourself made strong.
àkɔ a bòg ndiah mee lε?	what has demolished that house?
esê	earth-mother cult
leshwɔ	friendship
“é le ŋáŋá mbɔŋ́ -mbɔŋ t ́ ɛ́myɛ-́ŋwɔ gap á fʉ́ʼ. a le toŋɔ á gap a le za bɛʼ bənu	forward bringing the additional five. he said, 'master, you gave me five talents. see, i have made five more.'his master said to him,'
à lɔ̀g àca' mbigte enya' zìàà è sàŋŋ ar eseh.	he has used soil to cover the soup that poured on the ground.
égî é kɔʼ tɛ́mbyɔ lebu, ŋ́ bin sɔʼɔ mə́ese.	they mounted up to heaven; they sank to the depths;
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a lèh baga.	this plantain got sour the day before yesterday.
ò lε'-ε e bi-i.	you will get missing days after tomorrow.
mbɔ̀ŋ	to be tasteful.
achɔ́ʼlefɛ́ʼ	lone surviving twin
mgbê	a particular masquerade dance performance
jɨ betat ŋ́ dɔk nkwɔ á ntí ntaŋ fi ŋwɔ́a le nɔŋ́ a mə.́ jisɔs a le keba abó ŋwɔ,́ ŋ́ dyɔ á mbó jɨ nghə, “talita, kum,” ŋ́ dɔgɔ ndyɔ le, “ŋwɔ́-mengwi, ŋ ghə́, ló ase!” ŋwɔ ́	three disciples and went to where she was. he took the twelve year-old girl by the hand and said,
bə, a kíʼté bənu nchɛm ŋ́ sogɔ gap. 	amos answered amaziah, “i was no prophet,
ndɛm a le lɛʼ ndɔk bəshɨle, ma arɛre, ma nkəʼte bənu, ma ncho, ma abo za a sɛn,	all of which the lord, your god, did for you in egypt before your very eyes?
nza nfʉʼ tɛ́ bó é te bɔ́ŋ eləŋ a le dʉ́ ajɛm bɔ́. eləŋ gî bəshwɔ bi é le júʼ bap, bó le	convinced he was out of his mind. the scribes who had come down from jerusalem
ŋwɔ! chɔʼɔ a gwʉk nchu-ndya!’	then the door was locked. afterwards the other virgins came and said,
bəchɛʼnjɛm bɛ é byɔ! ŋwɔ gi a ghə ajɛm za ndɛm a kɔ́ŋ le a ghə, jɨ se mbə́ amɛ̂	said, ‘here are my mother and my brothers. 
‘bɛtelehɛm á ntí abɛk-alɛʼ fi bə́tɔŋ le juda,	then herod called the magi secretly and ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearance.
le du'	refuse
anuza, ndɛm a le ghə ŋwɔnyɔŋ, élê a ghə bənu é lɛ́té,	for god formed man to be imperishable;
bema lɔ̀!	answer then!
abó-luŋɔ́ achyɛ́-byɔ a ghə mə́bəmyɛ́bənu	the joyful shout of victory in the tents of the just
bəbyɔ é bɔ́ŋ bəguʼ mi sá.	if only we suffer with him so that we may also be glorified with him.
a kei ten -nn ?	has it stood well?
ŋgya e ntèntə -əə?	is the family healthy?
le gap	distribute
à kèh bàbe a wʉg.	he cheated us yesterday.
byɔ bi é ten ndəŋ-ndəŋ a zɔ ndɛm é sɛɛ bɛʼ letyɔ̌, é tsɔ bɛʼ atʉ̌lɛbanɔŋ za bə́	whether we are at home or away.
ase ŋ́ chək afɛ́m nghə, “bwara!” ŋ́ dyɔ á mbó alɛʼɛ-alɛʼɛ-ntsa zǎ a se nchɨʼɔ nghə,	the wind ceased and there was great calm. then he asked them, “why are you terrified?
ebwɔ-betat,	brothers and sisters,
njɛnachɛ́ʼ	name of a locality
bó bəchɛm le lɔk nzá mɔʼfi mbɛm nghə, “bənu nchɛm mi achyɛ́-byɔ a lyɔ,	with one voice, ‘we will observe all the commands that the
àbàgtè a cia.	the level of confusion is very high.
à làh mbem a cʉ̀tè à gih.	if he accepted, it would be his/her look out.
nghə ləŋə-ləŋə gɛ a bɔ́ŋ efək	he refreshes my soul.
achyɛ́-byɔ, bətʉʼ mo é já lakɔ!	how manifold are your works, o lord!
àmɔ̀' ajuŋ a wu mbə̀gla geh.	i am feeling sick.
a kèh tè bɔ̀ŋ.	it was not good yesterday.
jisɔs a kwɔ, ŋ́ tɛn a tétsá bó nghə, “mbware ndɛm é bə́ mə́ byɔ.”	birds of every kind shall dwell beneath it,
toŋ-lègwʉ	mourning basket - normally it is a basket of raw food or cooked food. today it may be converted to cash gifts
é chə́ŋə́lé nzɔ lɛ,	more than sentinels wait for the dawn,
é la eləŋ mě, bajiʼi á mbó jisɔs nchap-mɔʼfi, é ghɔ mə́lebe galili, éfî jisɔs	the eleven disciples went to galilee, to the mountain to which jesus had ordered them.
nɔ̀ŋɔsɔŋ	ebony wood
á lé, a se mbə̂ ŋwɔ gi a tɛna tetsa ŋwɔ-ngha bó ndɛm ndɔk ndate lejɨʼ lesə. a	for this reason he is mediator of a new covenant since a death has taken place for deliverance
fʉ̀'ɔ mbin n jiɔ.	come and dance let me see.
à lε'-ε e bəŋ-te.	he will roll on the ground days after tomorrow.
a ndε' mbə bab go soŋ mà geh.	when it happens to be like that one day, you tell me.
a le, a guŋ ngɔŋ tɛ́bɛʼ a nyik bəgaŋ mbwɔ bi a lǎkú jɨ. ngaŋ mbwɔ gi a rɔkte a le zɔ, ́a bə́legʉ́.	for he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. the last enemy to be destroyed is death.
bəŋáŋ	brass dancing bells
achyɛ́-byɔ a lyɔ á mbó nyɔ nghə, “á nyɛ́anu za go ghə lɛ, ŋ ghɔ á tetsa bənya	then the lord god said to the serpent, ‘because you have done this, 
 abé za a fə́ á mbó fwɛt-fwɛt ndɛm á nkɔŋ, mbə lekak, mbə le ŋáŋ le mbɔŋ,	you before: those who behave like this will not inherit the kingdom of
ebwɔ-betat,	the fruit of the spirit,
nkamɛ́ʼ	special performance to send off a deceased person’s spirit
eleʼ lefɔ̌ le tɔgɔ, tɔmas bó ma bimɔʼ bajiʼi á mbó jisɔs é ké nchu-ndya ŋ́ bə́ á ntí,	it shall put forth branches and bear fruit, and become a majestic cedar.
mbə 	to be able to
ndəŋ-ndəŋ bó lekak é chɛʼ le shwɔ	to be holy and without blemish before him. 
à fəa e bè'-e.	he will one day carry it. when he returns, he will cary it.
nkɔle zamɔʼ alɨʼ ali nsaŋ á nyɛ́ byɔnyɔŋ ŋ́ ghə, “ali lejɨʼ achyɛ́-byɔ, ézâ byɔ ma bó	cast it towards the people. ‘this’ he said ‘is the blood of the 
japta	comfort
mbag	to bark
ŋgwì	leopard
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a bag mʉʉ.	this plantain is sour.
à kèh baŋŋ.	he/she fainted yesterday.
techi gi nghɔ bɔ́, ndɛʼ bɛʼ a ji nkwɛt ntyɔ́ júnɛ́, tɛ́bin kuʼu a le kwɔ a ndya jɨ, ŋ́ jə́.	his property unless he has tied up the strong man first.
bɔŋ eza nghə, ‘byɔ fya gwik émɔʼ bəvɛt ́ -nkɛʼ myɔ, anuza mənkɛʼ mʉk é sé brə́.’ bi	the foolish ones said to the wise,'give us some of your oil,
mə́ndya. ŋ dɛ̌achɛn te ndrɔ, byɔ fya gɛ məndrɔ. ŋ dé na ngwɔ̌, byɔ cheʼta gɛ, mbə	i was thirsty and you gave me drink, a stranger and
à lε'-ε e bàb-e a go.	he/she will cheat you someday.
ŋkap	money
go trak ebuŋ á nzɔ mə,	you spread the table before me
achɛnatrɔ́ʼ	heavy ensemble of materials carried by the lead troh
á nyɛ́ngɔŋ jɔ nchɛm. ŋ nyik mbwɔ a tetsa byɔ mengwi júnɛ́, é nyik mbwɔ a tetsa	of your life. i will make you enemies of each other: you and
à neim mbɔŋ esia.	she has a broad face.
a bàb à gih njiɔ!	let him cheat her and see!
esóʼó	young shoot of palm frond
nduŋ gi á bə gɛ abé boŋ.	has an unfailing prize.
mbàŋ 	to get ripe 
bó lɛ́n, é zá jɛm, é fya etá tʉ̌, ébî é ŋwété, ŋ́ díté, á	according to what he did in the body, whether good or evil.
mbìàŋ.	to mar
ò beta a t'atu mə̀ŋ kuɔ, ǹ cwì à go ajuŋ.	if what you will tell me is not convincing, i will deal with you.
mengwi nghə, “a kɔ́jyɔ za go ghə lɛ?” mengwi a ghə, “nyɔ é lǎtá gɛ, ŋ fɛt.” ndɛm	‘what is this you have done?’ the woman replied, ‘the serpent tempted me and i ate.’
ndem	god
ŋ ŋáŋ a ndya achyɛ́-byɔ	and i shall dwell in the house of the lord
byɔ fʉʼ nchɨ lekak ra byɔ bɔŋ,	o come, ring out your joy,
le nə́ŋ	stop
le jwɔ	purchase
à lε'ε  alei' e bag-le elʉ̀'	he will one day make a clatter of noise.
ŋ kɔ́ŋɔ́le jyɔ go má achyɛ́-byɔ, ləŋə-ləŋə gɛ a kɔ́ŋɔ́le juʼɔ asoŋɔ jo	i trust in the lord;
 a bɔ̀ŋ n jiɔ.	let him be fine let me see.
bo-gih e bote àlʉ̀'.	they have had sexual intercourse.
a mbɔŋ á le kɔŋta go ma achyɛ́-byɔ	lord, it is good to give thanks to you.
kɔ	choose
kijɛ́ʼ	a performance that ushers in a paramount chief into a celebration ground
kizɛ́ʼ	a performance that ushers in a paramount chief into a celebration ground
lekùɔ	four
shuʼɔ gi ŋ́ chɨ nghə a lé nghɔ. a le gɛ ghɔ, jisɔs a ndyɔ á mbó jɨ nghə,	sternly ordered him, ‘mind you say nothing to anyone, but go and show
bitla mfʉ̀'ɔ.	still/continue to come.
a meŋkə mbè'te ŋghìà tàà'.	he is a very proud/boastful fellow.
ntuli	six
ndiah.	house
mbɔŋ	own
nkrɔ-mbɔŋ achyɛ́-byɔ	the gospel of the lord
gò tə̀te lɛ̀ ?	are you well?
bɔg-ɔ	fear
à bà-à wʉg.	he will hate us.
à lò-u e bàb-e	he/she will cheat tomorrow.
bəfwɔ-atɛmangwát	paramount rulers
zɔ̀ŋzɔ̀	sound made by troh during their performance
abo za á bɔŋ etyɔ́, ma le bware byɔnyɔŋ, nghɔ á ntì tenduri elɛʼ, ŋ́ ndɔgɔ amɔʼ lé	this is why you must now know, and fix in your heart, that the lord is god
mbəbwat	a herbal medicinal concoction used to embalm newly enthroned notables
nyɛ́ bimɔʼ elɛʼ.	he was amazed at their lack of faith.
ŋdɔk efɛm za nghə byɔ bi é byɛbe,	by the breath of his mouth all their host.
bʉk é ghə.” mɔsɛs a le lɛtle bənu júnɛ́ nchɛm ase. a le bin ndǒ ase, ntí tetrɔʼ, ŋ́	lord has decreed.’ moses put all the commands of the lord
mmuockngia	name of locality
àkù	leg
le pite	resolve
ŋaŋa ntí.	shall flourish in the courts of our god.
achyɛ́-byɔ, go fə́á ntí lesee, ŋ́ turi ləŋ-ləŋ gɛ	o lord, you brought me up from the netherworld;
njɛn-ntsa	a locality
à kèh bəŋte ar eseh.	he rolled on the ground yesterday.
m be gò o jiɔ -ɔɔ?	should i pick it for you to see?
à bìg-le.	he will send it back.
m̀ bè' mʉʉ.	i have carried it.
legɔlyɔ, byɔ jɛrosalɛm bó byɔ juda,	but what it yielded was wild grapes.
é lǎ eləŋ mě, jisɔs a binjɛm alɛʼɛ bó, bajiʼi á mbó jɨ é zɔla gi, aleʼe a le jɨta ndɛm	jesus departed from there and came to his native place, accompanied by his disciples.
túŋ a nzɔ bó. saŋ a le ná nghɔ nzɔ, bó na nzɔla tɛ́nkwɔ alɨʼ fî ŋwɔ́a lá mə, ŋ́tɛn. eləŋ	they saw the child with mary his mother.
map, mbɛ̂ alɛʼ júnɛ́ a tɛgɛ. achɛna-ndya sǎ a gap nyɛt á nyɛ́ məkó, ŋ́ ná ndrɔ	divided against itself, that household can never stand.
mbieb	to watch
à bɔŋ enti.	he is courageous.
e kèh brəə.	it got missing/quenched yesterday.
m̀ fà'à e bə̀ŋte.	i want to lick it.
te bap bɔ́ndete, bó ji mbə mə ndya-atɛk. bó bin zá le nchɨ-nkrɔ ndɛm a lǎ nkó	they shall know that a prophet has been among them.
bəfwɔ shɛba, bó mi sɛba é lɔk techi é fʉʼ fya gi.	the kings of arabia and seba shall bring tribute.
zá bənu, bɛʼ le ghə bənu ndəŋ-ndəŋ, ma nkɔŋ za byɔ bɔŋ á mbó bʉk, byɔ jyɔ le	speak and know more. you are eager to give, and you love us better. now you must give more
ebwɔ-bətat ŋ mikte nghə byɔ juʼ mə́bɛʼ ndɛm a fya mbware jyɔ á mbó mə. njuʼ bɛʼ	you have heard of the stewardship of god’s grace that was given to me for your benefit, 
pia.	avocado
gini bɛʼ fwɛt-fwɛt ndɛm a kɔ́ŋ. bəbyɔ bɛʼ lǎté nyɛt jɨbyɔ, tɛʼ bəbyɔ bɛʼ fɛʼ bəlɛʼ. bə́	christ jesus unless you crucify all self-indulgent passions and desire.
akɔ́bin ghə é fya mə́eta bi é kě nchu?	did it bring forth wild grapes?
byɔ a ghə, məŋwɛt ŋ byɛp mənjɨ mɛ é chɨ gap alɨʼ zǎ bó nɔŋɔ mə, é jɨte. ŋ fɛʼ bi é	myself will give them rest, says the lord god.
mbó amɔʼ njɛm ŋwɔ á nkó bəgaŋ byɔ, byɔ le leʼte a le ghə mǎ á mbó mə́.’ bə́túŋ nkó	not do for one of these least ones, you did not do for me.’
wɔ ?	who?
mbìà.	to peel
mbɔ̀ŋ	to be pretty.
ŋ  kà' ntem a nɔ̀	i shot an animal in the morning.
mbate	come closer
legʉ́ŋwɔ gi a bɛm-ndɛm, á myɛ́anu á mbó achyɛ́-byɔ	precious in the eyes of the lord is the death of his faithful ones.
gi, tɛ́nfʉ́ʼ á shyɛle jɨ.”	and have come to do him homage.”
m̀ bɔg a go.	i fear you.
gɛ. ŋ tuŋɔ gwɔ fwɛt-fwɛt júnɛ́égî a fə́á mbó mbê gɛ. a soŋ bənu lɔk lata gɛ. byɔ	because you have been with me from the beginning.
nyik njɔŋ á nyɛ́ mə́, égî é lá satan, nghə a fya gɛ ngəʼ, nza le, ŋ te kwaʼe nyɛt	a thorn in the flesh was given to me, an angel of satan,
à kei soŋ -ŋŋ ?	has he/she said it?
à soŋ mʉʉ lε ?	has he/she said it?
lenyǎ	masquerade dance
mfəa	to originate
a lě, bɛʼ byɔ tɛn nzɔ á nyɛ ́bənu nchɛm; bɛʼ lebɛm ndɛm, bɛʼ le soŋ bənu, bɛʼ le	you do everything better than anyone else. you have stronger faith. you
bɔŋɔ le zɔ́jisɔs krist alɨʼə kɔ?” ́	they said to him, “in bethlehem of judea, for thus it has been written through the prophet:
á le ghə le ŋ bɛʼ kwaʼe nyɛt legha á nyɛ́ tenduri bənu mi ndɛm a chɨ gɛ. bə le	that i, paul, might not become too elated, because of the abundance of the revelations,
jǎ	draw
kɔŋ ndɛm, ŋ́ zɔle mbyɔ mi. a bɛʼɛ mbə lě, le kɔŋ ndɛm a le zɔle mbyɔ mi. mbyɔ	who indeed is the victor over the world but the one who believes that jesus is the son of god?
ebuŋ le ŋ dʉ́. ntí gɛ é nǎ nfʉ̌, byɔ fya á gɛ ntsa lě ŋ nó. ŋ dɛ̌nghɔ-ŋwɔ, byɔ lɔkta gɛ	from the foundation of the world. for i was hungry and you gave me food, 
nkwídiŋ	type of drum
mbê gɛ a le lɛʼ mpite á mbó byɔ bɛʼ ngɔŋ é le ge jǐ. ́ nji le na nkô á gɛ, byɔ fya a gɛ	inherit the kingdom prepared for you
à kèh tè botè	he did not join it.
à fəa fɔ?	where does it/he/she come from?
ŋ tɔŋ lelɛn achyɛ́-byɔ 	and i will call upon the name of the lord.
a se mbə̀ŋə ncù gih.	he is licking his mouth.
ŋ te kʉ́bɔ́, ŋ ŋáŋ ngɔŋ, é soŋ bənu mi achyɛ́-byɔ a ghə	the stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone.
betat	three
saambia	seven
à hʉ̀ə̀-ə e be-e.	he will pick it later on today.
mbó mə. byɔ bin fya gap ntsa á nyɛ́lelɛn mbê, bó ŋwɔ́, ma fwɛt-fwɛt. byɔ	and of the son, and of the holy spirit,
lekak é bə́á mbó ŋwɔ gi achyɛ́-byɔ á te lefɛ ra jyɔ	blessed the man to whom the lord imputes not guilt,
a mbɔŋ á le kɔŋta achyɛ́-byɔ,	we are always courageous, although we know that while we are at home in the body
à bə̀ŋ-ə mbo mih.	he will lick his hands.
le tɛ'	select
a ba-te.	it will come closer.
a le fə́á nyɛ́nyɛt za, ŋ́ ghə̂ŋwɔnyɔŋ, nza le a bɔŋ ngɔŋ te mě	the image of his own nature he made him.
o se ntema à nɔ̀ 	you are shooting an animal.
fwɛt efwɛt, égî a ghə byɔ bɔk elɨʼ bɔ́. bə fya gwɔ mə fwɛt-fwɛt gi á ghə byɔ chɛʼ	for you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear,
tangwinghɔ a chɔʼ nghə, ‘enənyə a le, ŋ ta gwɔ za.’	'lord, lord, open the door for us!' but he said in reply,
ndéé	dancing foot wear – ankle rattles
nkhə-ekuŋ	special performance apparatus used to announce the opening of dance performances during a funeral
“mbware ndɛm é bə́ mə́ byɔ!” eləŋ gî a le lyɔ bɛ́ʼɛ́ ndó, ŋ́ chɨ gap mbó mi, bó	so the other disciples said to him, “we have seen the lord.” but he said to them, “unless i see the mark of the nails in his hands and put my finger into the nailmarks and put my hand into his side, i will not believe.”
bɔ́. a le bin chɛʼɛ nghɔ mə́ á nyɛ́ elɨ́ʼ bí a bə́ jɨlejɨ, tɛ́ʼ byɔnyɔŋ é ké na fə́ elɨ́ʼ	places where nobody lived. even so, people from all around would come
za a fə́ á nyɛ́ jisɔs ŋ́ fya bəbyɔ. bəbyɔ fə́ á nyɛ́ ali za, ŋ́ kwɛre, ŋ́ bin mbɔ́ŋ bəcha	who accomplishes all things according to the intention of his will,
jisɔs a le lɔk məgɛ myɔ, ŋ́chɨ byɔnyɔŋ bənu-ndɛm bɛʼ bó le kuʼɔ le juʼ. jisɔs a la	there earn your bread by prophesying,
jarus nghə, “bɛʼ bɔk, bô mbɛm mə ́ndɛm go.” jisɔs a la tɛ ́bɛm le ŋwɔ zɔla gi nghɔ bɔ,́ ndɛʼɛ pita bó jems ma nchɛʼnjɛm gi jɔn.	the jesus went inside and said to them, “why are you crying and carrying on like this? the
aruli za babɔ̌-ndya é le pɛʼ ngwɛʼ, a le bin nchɛʼ atɔ̌-ndya	this is the day the lord has made let us be glad and rejoice in it.
bətʉ̌van á nyɛ́ajəʼə́?”	what will the owner of the vineyard do to those tenants when he comes?"
mbaŋ 	covulse
ǹ dèh temm a nyà 	i shot an animal the day before yesterday.
à bə̀ fʉ̀' -ʉ̀ʉ̀?	can he/she come now?
a lèh tè bɔ̀ŋ.	it was not good the other day.
ǹ jɔ̀gle ndiah	i greet each and everone in the house.
mba	to cover
àmɔ̀' ajuŋ a wu mbə̀gla geh.	i am feeling like to vomit.
à kei fʉ̀' -ʉ̀ʉ̀	has he/she come?
à fʉ̀' mʉʉ lε ?	has he/she come?
ndwat	mixture of herbs for spiritual cleansing (christian communion?)
fʉ̀'ɔ mbate er fɔ̀h.	come closer to this place.
à leih ba.	he covered it long ago.
a gwɔ a bə jyɔ mengwi mbɔŋ?́	when one finds a worthy wife,
achyɛ́-byɔ, go chǎ mə bəsɔ mɛ.	and you took away the guilt of my sin.
à ŋaŋŋ er fɔ ?  	where does he/she live?
alɛmte	brief ceremony to send away evil spirits
bin ngé sɛté, emɔʼ byɔ bi é za anu ndɔk ndate bəsaŋ, é f ́ ə́abɛk fi nyɔ a ná nsɛʼɛ ŋ́fʉ́ʼ	behold, magi from the east arrived in jerusalem, saying, 
“a bin dyɔ á mbo byɔ bi é ŋáŋ abó-kibi jɨ é nghə̌, ‘byɔ bəgaŋ ndɔ é lǒ á ngəŋ mə́ŋ́	then he will say to those on his left, ‘depart from me, 
ǹ zɔ̀gle tàwɔwɔ yèè a fàh.	i greet everybody here.
bó le bɔ́ŋ lekak bɛʼ achyɛ́-byɔ a le bwara afɛm	they rejoiced that they were calmed,
à lèh bɔɔ èlìàh.	he build a bridge the day before yesterday.
fʉ́ʼ za.	for you know neither the day nor the hour."
fwɛt gi á nyɛ́ bəbyɔ é bóte á le chɨ le bəbyɔ é ewɔŋkə ndɛm. le bə́ ewɔŋkə ndɛm, 	the spirit himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of god,
kě nchu-ndya.	while they went off to buy it, the bridegroom came
bó le kina se, ŋ́shyɛle ŋwɔ. bó le shyɛla ndǒ ́ ŋ́turi techi abɔ, égî bó le lɔk f ́ ʉ́ʼɔ á jyɔ	then they opened their treasures 
mbɔg.	to fear
bənu te bɔ́ŋ bi bó lyɔ. tɛʼ ŋwɔ a jɔ̌té fwɛt-fwɛt-ndɛm, bə́ gɛ gi cha, anuza a ghə	forgiven, and all their blasphemies but let anyone blaspheme against the holy spirit and he will never have
à brɔ̀gle enyiet zìàh.	he has stirred his body.
mbit	still be 
é chəŋte ana júnɛ, ́ ŋ te káŋ bətʉ̌júnɛ́bɔ, ́ tɛʼ ŋ gɛ́bəchɛn pite.	yes, i will make it a ruin:
bə́ tɔŋ le judêzim, emɔʼ nkó bəbyɔ é fə́ a krete bó arabya, tɛʼ bəbyɔ ke nâ njuʼɔ	both jews and converts to judaism, cretans and arabs,
lefə. é le gé sɛte myɛ́ afɛ́m a ji le tɔk, ntsa é ji le chɨ ŋ́ ji le kwɔ á ntí akano, tɛ́ a	so that it was already filling up. jesus was in the stern, asleep on a cushion.
mbware á mbó byɔ bi achyɛ́-byɔ a tɛʼɛ ndɔk nghə bi	blessed the people the lord has chosen to be his own
bi, byɔ bɔŋ legɔlyɔ, á ghə bó bɔŋ ebuŋ bi bó se nkɔŋɔ, nza le, tenduri ebuŋ bi bó	i am not trying to make life easier for others by making life harder for you. but it is only fair for
à kei co -oo?	has he/she come down?
à co mʉʉ lε ?	has he/she come down?
ŋ́ghə bənu bɛʼ jɨ kɔŋ́	who walk in his ways!
mbà	to hate
mbɛ̀	to hate
á le kwɛ lekwɛ á lelɛn go mə mbwa ndɛm, égî a ghə ese bó lebu,	we are away from the lord, for we walk by faith, not by sight.
ndɛm ma nâ nchɨ go nza, mbɛ̂ go ta se nzɔla mə lebyɔ bɔ́. é bin ge bə́ legɔlyɔ,	are so opposed that you do not always carry out your good intentions.
elʉ̀'	noise
à bem mʉʉ lε?	has he/she answered?
gɛ fə́. go bɛʼ lɛʼ za chɨ nkrɔ gɛ á bətel, anuza á lɨʼ za fwɔ sɛnte ndɛm, ŋ́ bə́myɛ́	i was a shepherd and a dresser of sycamores. 
mo yèh à kèh tye mbə'te ŋkwʉ.	his child died of a sudden and of a mysterious death.
ò bɔ̀-ɔ lε?	will you dry it?
ajɛm za ŋ ghə̌á nyɛ́ana bətʉ̌van a jɛ a le,	what i mean to do with my vineyard:
a lɔgɔ gɛ nghɔ mə ngəŋ ntsa gî ŋwéte,	beside restful waters he leads me;
mbagle	to become damaged
bəguʼ jɨ bó ma bəchəʼ-ndɛm a ŋáŋ alaŋa lefwɔ jɨ. byɔ ngɔŋ nchɛm é fʉ́ʼʉ́é nyokte	throne, and all the nations will be assembled before him.
go eləŋə kɔ́nji nǎ nkó go, bʉ́k fya go ebuŋ, kě ntí go na nfʉ́, bʉ́k fya go ntsa? é lǎ é	and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink?
bebiɔ̀	we cover
bebə̀ e ba	we cover
nghə mbinyɛt jap é lɛ́, mbɛ̂ byɔ mɨkte nghə ali krist za fwɛt-fwɛt ndɛm a le ghə	can sanctify those who are defiled so that their flesh is cleansed,
èbuaŋkə e tiɔ̀te lɛ̀ ?	are your children well?
bó.”	our eyes are fixed on the lord, pleading for his mercy.
mbàb	to deceive 
à leih ba' atu.	she plaited the hair a long time ago.
ŋ de nǎ nchəŋə lě bənu bə́bɛʼ é bɔŋ́ ɔ́le bə, ŋ́bin njyɔ ma li byɔnyɔŋ,	he looked for judgment, but see, bloodshed!
à wɔ a bub -ee? 	who is he/she?
́binjɛm a ndya, achɛʼɛka ŋwɔnyɔŋ a bô	when his relatives heard of this, they set out to take charge of him,
mbɔŋ	to have
gih a wɔ ?	who is he?
mbɔ̀	to sun
kwɔ á ntí alɨʼ á lɛ̌, legɔt mɔʼfi, á lɔk nkuʼ. a le te lɔk ali məbrɔ bó ma za ebwɔ	that is, not belonging to this creation, he entered once for all into the sanctuary,
eləŋ mě jisɔs a chə, lefwa ra lebu é bɛʼɛ. ewɔŋkə bangwi legɛm é le lɛʼ mbə, ébî é le ́	jesus told his disciples this parable "the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins
mbó go. a le, njɛm é fin a ngɔŋ, byɔnyɔŋ é bə́á ntí elɨʼ fin. achyɛ́-byɔ a ke	see, darkness covers the earth, and thick clouds cover the peoples
àtsiɔ̀h mee a bou mbagle bɔ̀.	that vehicle has become completely damaged.
à gʉ̀-ʉ e bab-e	he/she will cheat later on in the day.
é binjɛm á nyɛ́achɛʼ za bó le fə́mə́,	may the lord be glad in his works!
à lèh bàbe a wʉg.	he cheated us the day before yesterday.
à kei soŋ -ŋŋ ?	has he/she told it?
à soŋ mʉʉ lε ?	has he/she told it?
nkwita gɛ ma achyɛ́-byɔ,	o lord, be my helper.
lè-bàlè à tè bɔ̀ŋ.	the act of hating each other is not good.
le tɔtá	support
ò bɔg lɛ̀?.	do you fear?
byɔ bi etǎ-ntí byɔ elɛ̂.	all you upright of heart.
mbog.	to bark
lèbàgtè gih à tè bɔ̀ŋ.	the extent to which he confounds himself is beyound understanding
àkèndɔ̀ŋ a kèh bàŋŋ.	the plantain got ripe yesterday.
ci'tà m be.	let me pick it.
à bìglà, ò soŋ à geh.	if when he returns tell me.
kɔ́ŋ, nyɛt jo lɛ̌!” agwɔ-kap a le lě ntúŋɔ nyɛ́ jɨ, nyɛt za é le ndɛ̌. jisɔs a	left him at once and he was cured. jesus immediately sent him away and
à pè enyiet ziàh tàà'.	he respects himself so much.
go za njǎ. fʉ́ʼɔ te kak!’ “ŋwɔ gi a le lɔk nkap bətɔsɛn bebya, a fʉ́ʼɔ zá, nghə, ‘myɛ-́	'master, you gave me two talents. see, i have made two more.' his master said to him, 'well done, my good and faithful servant.
takəkə gi go ghə, ké le dʉ́ ebuŋ, te bap bɔ́ nó, ghə a bap a le lɔk guʼte ndɛm.	whatever you eat, whatever you drink, whatever you do at all, do it for
m̀ bà lègàh loh tàà'	i hate your attitude.
bebya, gimɔʼ á fya tɔsɛn mɔʼfí. a le gh ́ ə bɛʼɛ, ŋ́bin ndô nghɔ legini. ŋwɔ gi a le lɔk	and made another five.
le túŋ	send
byɔ te bənu mi bó ghə kɔ́ŋ. bó le bin nghɔ ma abe ŋ́ chɨ nkrɔ-ndɛm ŋ́ nghə	as the lord spoke to me, the spirit entered into me
mbó mi jálɛ́a le fya ajɛm á mbó bəboŋ,	she puts her hands to the distaff,
‘aruli za babɔ̌-ndya é le pɛʼ ngwɛʼ,	jesus said to them, "did you never read in the scriptures
bo alla' ndàŋta mbiaŋta.	they are wandering aimlessly.
à lε'-ε e bà-a gih a gà nəŋ.	he will never stop hating him/her.
à gʉ̀-ʉ e bieb-e a go.	he will guard you later today.
mɑ̌ gò a l'à wɔ ? 	what is the name of your mother?
kwáŋ	metal ankle bracelet for chiefs’ wives
ŋ ghə, sɛʼɛ anu jyɔ	now, inhabitants of jerusalem and people of judah,
njáŋ	wooden xylophone
m̀bɔ̀-èkùŋ	costume for masquerade
mbe	to narrate
afwɛt	plastic pipe used as sound instrument
afɛm za a le nǎ nchɨʼɔ myɛ́alɛʼɛ-alɛʼɛ ntsa, a tɛn le kwak. 	and the billows of the sea were stilled.
bɛʼ bə ́lɛtle á ntí akata ndɛm lě, “ŋwɔ gi a le bɔŋ tenduri, amɔʼ ajɛm za a le chɛʼɛ,	more than enough, and you are in need, they can share with you. then everyone will have a fair share.
a chɨ gwɔ bənu nchɛm mi é enənyə. a te lɔk etyɔ́gi soŋə bɔ́. a soŋɔ gwɔ mə́bənu	take what is mine and declare it to you. all that the father has is mine. for this reason i said that
á nyɛ́ lelɛn krist, ŋ bɔŋ lekak á le bɛm bəfɛ mɛ, ma ajɔ̌té, ma ngəʼ, ma bəshɨri á	therefore, i am content with weaknesses, insults,
byɔ bɛʼ gúŋ nkwaŋa, byɔ bɛʼ gúŋ nkáp. byɔ gwik edyɛle, tɛʼ byɔ bɛʼ nyik emɔʼ	leave there and shake the dust off your feet
ò gʉ̀-ʉ e bi-i.	you will get missing this afternoon.
àkɔ̀fe.	coffee
ntsa	job
mbatte	to pack things
ò kèh tè be, è?	you said you did not pick it, did you?
anuza, myɛ-́ŋwɔ, égî a ləŋta gwɔ, byɔ isrɛ a tuŋ má alɛʼ byɔ.’	when you have found him, bring me word, that i too may go and do him homage.”
ò kèh baa ajuŋ mee mə mvein-nn?	did you cover that thing with grass?
achyɛ́-byɔ juʼɔ gɛ, ŋ́ mbɔŋ bəcha á nyɛ́mə́,	hear, o lord, and have pity on me;
le chɨ le achyɛ́-byɔ a ten ndəŋ-ndəŋ.	jesus said to the crowds,
àkèndɔ̀ŋ a lèh bàŋŋ.	the plantain got ripe the day before yesterday.
fɔ́?” a chɔʼ nghə, “ŋ juʼ bɛʼ go gina á ntí ana, ŋ́ bɔk elɨʼ anuza, ŋ kɛʼɛ achɛn te	‘i heard the sound of you in the garden’ he replied, ‘i was afraid because i was naked, 
bɛʼ bʉk bɛm á mbó go ma achyɛ́-byɔ.	who have put our hope in you.
à fà'à à wɔ ?	who is he/she looking for?
mbà	to abominate
mbɛ̀	to abominate
mɛʼɛ á nfɛn abe, ́ ŋ́zɔ.” ́	'this is the heir. come, let us kill him and acquire his inheritance.'
à lεε guɔh -ɔɔ?	good morning to you people.
à kei la a wəh -əə?	good morning to you people.
achyɛ́-byɔ a bɔ́ŋ lekak á nyɛ́bətʉʼ mi a ghə	and return to their dust.
nkwɔ-ekung	the dress for a masquerade
a tura gap á ntí məngəʼ.	from their straits he rescued them,
o bigte.	you should cover it with soil.
à bìglà, ò soŋ à geh.	if he returns it tell me.
chɛʼ fi a fə́ mə, ndʉʼə gi á tetsa byɔ bi, ma achɛna-ndya jap.” a la te kúʼú a le ghə	and among his own kin and in his own house.”
lefɛ. a le fə́ á nyɛ́ nkɔ́ŋ zǎ á mbɔ́ŋɔ́ á nyɛ́ bəbyɔ, ŋ́ ghə bəbyɔ fə́ á nyɛ́ krist ŋ́mbə́	to sum up all things in christ, in heaven and on earth.
é fə́á nyɛ́bətʉʼ mi mbó mo ghə, go dʉ́ebuŋ	for you shall eat the fruit of your handiwork;
gɛ bó nchɛʼnjɛm gɛ́ gi mbaŋa bó gi mengwi.”	anyone who does the will of god, that person is my brother and sister and mother.
mɔ̀'fi	one
mbwere nyɛt á ntí nkó ŋ́ chɛte nghə, “a gwɔ a fɛń məndrɔ mɛ?” bajiʼi á mbó jɨ é chɔʼ nghə, “go jyɔ ́bɛʼ byɔnyɔŋ á tǎ go mbuŋ, ŋ́ nâ nyila go, mbin ná nchɛta nghə,	a little while later, some men came from jairus’ home and said, “your daughter has died! why
tɛ́bɛʼ ngɔŋ é me.” 	and behold, i am with you always, until the end of the age."
lèliŋ loh e l'àkɔ ?	what is your name?
à kei soŋ -ŋŋ ?	has he/she narrated it?
à soŋ mʉʉ lε ?	has he/she narrated it?
akâ	wooden drum
a kei bɔ̀ŋ -ŋŋ ?	is it alright? 
a bɔ̀ŋ mʉʉ lε ?	is it alright? 
mbin.	to dance.
é lǎ eləŋ mě, jisɔs a soŋ bajiʼi á mbó jɨ ngɛ jyɔ nghə, mbaŋa mɔʼ a le lɛʼ na nghɔ legini,	jesus told his disciples this parable: "a man going on a journey called in his servants and entrusted his possessions to them.
bəbyɔ é bɔ́ŋ etyɔ́ eləŋ nchɛm. bəbyɔ za le, bɛʼ bəbyɔ é lɔk nyɛt jyɔ ŋáŋa ngɔŋ,	and through it all the seed would sprout and grow, he knows not how.
kê	close
gɛná	close
eləŋ gî é le fə́lebɛm mbəʼə ŋ́ tuŋ,	who shut within doors the sea, when it burst forth from the womb 
à lε'-ε e bieb-e a go.	he will guard you days after tomorrow.
bin ndʉ́ʼɔ gi. jisɔs a lyɔ á mbó bó nghə, “bə́ guʼte nchɨ-nkrɔ-ndɛm elɨʼ nchɛm tɛ	jesus said to them,“a prophet is not without honor except in his native place
jyɔ nkɛʼ gi go lɔk nfʉʼ. bʉʼɔ atu jo, ŋ́bwɛre nyɛt jo, ŋ́jyɔ elɨʼ. ŋwɔnchɛm gi	nations shall walk by your light, and kings by your shining radiance.
tɔmas gi a lɛ́ amɔʼ ŋwɔ á nkó byɔ nchap-bya, égî bə́ le tɔŋ le ŋwɔ́-lefɛk, a la ta asé	but these are written that you may come to believe that jesus is the christ, the son of god, and that through this belief you may have life in his name.
lebyɔ mosɛs lyɔ.” jisɔs a lyɔ bap, mbaŋa júnɛ́ a ke bin nghɔ ŋ́ saŋ nkrɔ elɨʼ	started talking about it freely and telling the story everywhere, so that
eleʼ nchɛm	for years to come.
ase, ŋwɔ gɛ kúʼɔ́le kə̌bɔ. ́	like labor pains upon a pregnant woman, and they will not escape.
èfà'kèè	tree whose fruits are used to make dancing rattles
ngəʼ júnɛ́. bəbyɔ bɛʼ tɨʼ emik məmyɔ á nyɛ́ ebuŋ bi bə́ sé njyɔ, bə́ tɨʼ má nyɛ́ ebuŋ	is producing for us an eternal weight of glory
ò kei biagle a geh -ee?	have you asked my opinion?
áluŋáchába	masquerade dance
gɛm lebʉ́ndi nkap myɛ-́ŋwɔ gi á ntí.	"after a long time the master of those servants came back and settled accounts with them. the one who had received five talents came 
bəguʼ é bə́mi achyɛ́-byɔ	praise to you, lord jesus christ.
èmbà ŋùɔ̀ a me ndem.	the only person who can truly hate a person is god.
babɛm-ndɛm ébî e le gin nkwi ku, é le bɔ́ŋ atǎ-ntí mɔʼfi bó ləŋə-ləŋə	the community of believers was of one heart and mind, and no one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but they had everything in common.
bʉk sɛ lɛʼ za sala go bɔ́	then we will no more withdraw from you;
tɔŋ le mɔnstat égî eləŋ gî bə zɔ̌ á nyɛ́achɛʼ, a kək ndɔk nzɔ́ a ngɔŋ, a bin tsɔ ŋ́	without parables he did not speak to them,
gǒ ngaŋ bətʉʼ gi a ghə bətʉʼ mi á mbɔŋɔ. go chɨ enənyə á ny ́ ɛ́ŋwɔ̌nkap, ŋ bin fya	received two talents also came forward and said,
achyɛ́-byɔ á le lyɔ á mbó mosɛs bó ɛrɔn nghə, “a lɨʼ nyɛt ŋwɔ a lǒ, te bap bɔ	the lord said to moses and aaron, “if someone has on his skin a scab or pustule or blotch 
é lǎ eləŋ júnɛ́, mɔsɛs a fʉʼ ŋ́ soŋ byɔnyɔŋ bənu nchɛm mi achyɛ́-byɔ a lyɔ, ma	moses went and told the people all the commands of the
fwandɛm	a place of sacrifice and worship of god for nweh people
asong à kei zɔ̀ -ɔɔ ?	has asong rubbed it?
asong à zɔ̀ mʉʉ lε ?	has asong rubbed it?
à bem mʉʉ lε?	has he/she agreed?
takəkə gi ŋ ghə, ŋ vɛna le ghə ntí ŋwɔnchɛm é bɔ́ŋ. ŋ te mɨkte mə nyɛt jɛ ndɛʼ	all times, not anxious for my own advantage but for the advantage of
a ndya. fwɛt-fwɛt-ndɛm a kwɔ á nyɛ́ bó bəchɛm, bó ji le lɔk elɛʼ jɨʼɔ ŋ́ soŋə bɛʼ	and they were all filled with the holy spirit and began to speak in different tongues, 
ŋ bə́á ntí ndya achyɛ́-byɔ	and i shall dwell in the house of the lord
bà-lèmbə' e bou mbàŋte ar akèè fɔh nja.	so many bananas have gotten ripe in this yard.
ncù-ndiah.	door
ŋ kei la' mbab ndòò.	i have already trimmed the hair.
ǹ da' me mba' ndòò.	i have already trimmed the hair.
le kwite	help
à bəŋ-te.	he will roll on the ground.
à gʉ̀-ʉ e bəŋ-te	he will roll on the ground.
é lǎ eləŋ mě, jisɔs a jiʼi myɛ́-alɛʼɛ-alɛʼɛ ntsa galili, ŋ́ binjɛm á nyɛ ́zamɔʼ abɛk, achɛʼɛka ŋwɔnyɔŋ	jesus got into the boat and crossed lake galilee. then, as he stood on the shore, a large crowd
à bàà a tei bɔ̀ŋ, a za mpite mba.	if he realises that it is not well covered, let him cover it again.
ghɔ á ndɔk jɨ, anuza byɔnyɔŋ é na nghə, “a byǎ mé!” emɔʼ bachɨ lebyɔ mosɛs, ébî	were saying, ‘beelzebul is in him,’ and, ‘it is through the
é lǎ eləŋ mě, jisɔs bó ma bajíʼí á mbó jɨ é	jesus went home with his disciples, and such a crowd collected that they could not even have a meal. 
àkèndɔ̀ŋ a leih bàŋ.	the plantain got ripe long ago.
chwara	delete
bəkɔŋte, á nyɛ́lelɛn ra, érâ lɛ̌	thanks to his holy name.
fi go te zɔ, mbé mə fi go te nálé. ́ ŋ de nǎ mbɔǵ ɔ, ́ ŋ́ghɔ ndi nkap jo á ntí lébʉ́. nkap	here it is back.' his master said to him in reply, 'you wicked, lazy servant!
legεm	ten
ò gʉ̀-ʉ e big-te.	you will come with soil this afternoon to fill it.
aluŋndeŋá	masquerade on stilts
á nyɛ́ngɔŋ jo nch ́ ɛm.	all the days of your life.
ndəŋ-ndəŋ á fə́lebu ndəŋte ngɔŋ	in accord with the favor of his will,
mbaŋ 	to faint
myɛ́nkɔŋ á bə́tɛ́bɛʼ fwɔtʉ̌a mě	and profound peace, till the moon be no more.
e kɛ̀'	it got missing this morning.
kà' mbrə.	it got missing this morning.
ò lò-u e bi-i.	you will get missing tomorrow.
mbó ngaŋ ndya nghə, ‘nchɨ-akate a ghə, ntaŋ za bʉk ma bajiʼi á mbó mə é dʉ́	disciples?” he will show you a large upper room furnished with couches, all prepared. make the
atô	tall drum
jʉh bɔŋ etìɔ̀.	he is strong, powerful.
go te njɛm á nyɛ́bəmyɛ́alɛʼ émî á ntí eləŋə bi é juda b ́ ɔ, ́	he sent them to bethlehem and said, “go and search diligently for the child.
a le gɛm ese, ŋ́turi bəruri,	on a fertile hillside;
achɛn-a-bəfwɔ	type of metal gong
le tɔ́ŋ	outline
bina n jiɔ!	dance let me see!
ebuŋ nchɛm é bə́bɛʼ ndɛm a le tǎ bap, ŋ́ bin kɔ́ŋ lě é bə́. ndɛm a le tɛʼɛ bəbyɔ élě	which is the first installment of our inheritance
ewɔŋkə bó é ŋáŋ ngabe tabele go,	your children like olive plants
ngóŋmenda	a particular dance performance
o bab atu ŋua gi.	you should trim that child's hair.
bənya bi é mbɛʼ, é tɔk ŋ́fɛt	and the beasts of the field feed upon it?
mbote	to combine
lekwɛ nkɔŋ́ , ndɔk ndate ana bətʉ̌van a za.	my friend's song concerning his vineyard.
ndya bó bənya mi mbɛʼ ŋ́ jɔ go nghə, go lɔk lebɛm lo é gini é fɛtla achɛʼ aleʼ nchɛm	‘be accursed beyond all cattle, all wild beasts. you shall crawl on your belly and eat dust every day
nyɛ́byɔnyɔŋ tenduri, ŋ́ jɔʼ bəvɛt olif á nyɛ́bəgwɔ, ŋ́ bin bú gap. 	son of man, i am sending you to the israelites,
ngwɔ-trɔ́ʼ	‘gun’ - rugged walking stick for troh
nfʉʼ á mbó go, bə́jyɔ bəguʼ mi á nyɛ́go. elɛʼ é lɔk nkɛʼ go, é gin, bəfwɔ é	but upon you the lord shines, and over you appears his glory.
etyɔ́a le tuli bəfwɛt-fwɛt te bɔ́ŋ á nyɛ́byɔnyɔŋ. a le sɛmta gap nghə, “byɔ bɛʼ	“wherever you enter a house, stay there until you leave. 
m̀ fǝa e bɔg-ɔ.	i will one day fear.
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a kein mbag.	this plantain got sour this morning.
gitá	direct
bɔ́, te bap bɔ́ŋwɔ nchɨ-nkrɔ ndɛm. ŋ dəŋte mə́ebuŋ-nkrə, ŋ́ pite bətʉ̌mi bə tɔŋ	lord, let us see your kindness, and grant us your salvation.
nkɔʼ	part of the house or veranda, or in lemoo where the chief or senior persons in the family sit
“fwɔ bin chɔʼɔ á mbó bó nghə, ‘ŋ soŋɔ gwɔ enənyə, bənu mi byɔ le leʼte á le ghə á	he will answer them, ‘amen, i say to you, what you did 
a le bwara fɛm,	he hushed the storm to a gentle breeze,
ndɛm a fə́zayɔn ŋ́fya go mbware.	the lord bless you from zion:
abe	benefit
lefɔɔ	eight
é le fə́ jɛrosalɛm é ná ndyɔ le, “a bɔ́ŋ fwɛt-fwɛt gi bə́ tɔŋ le bɛzɛbu á nyɛ́ jɨ! fwɔ	prince of devils that he casts devils out.’ so he called
á le kɔŋta go é tetrɔ á nyɛ́nkɔŋ bó bəcha mi go fya gwʉk. ŋ kɔŋta go sa	yet we are courageous, and we would rather leave the body and go home to the lord.
mə́ngaŋ bətʉʼ go, ŋ́ mbə ŋwɔ́gi go lɔk mbó mo mbɔ.	i am your servant, the son of your handmaid
ntwɔ ebuŋ á nkɔʼ achyɛ́-byɔ, ŋ́ bin fya gi ebuŋ lekak ébî é la bənya bi bə tɔŋ le njakas.	israelites to offer holocausts and to immolate bullocks to the
bə'ɔ mfa atsem ar mbo yeh.	break it and give a piece of it to him.
a chɛna le shɨli nyɛt a te bə, tɛʼ byɔ ke ná nfɛʼɛ ajɛm, byɔ sɛnte-ndɛm a mə. byɔ lɔk bəsɛnte bó	have no anxiety at all, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving,
bɛ́ʼɛ́, é byɔ galili? akɔ́ bin nghə bəbyɔ bəchɛm é juʼ a gap bɛʼ bó chɛʼɛ nsoŋɔ mə́	they were astounded, and in amazement they asked, “are not all these people who are speaking galileans?
fə́ndɛ,ʼ tɛ bɛʼ byɔ lô aləŋə fə́. byɔ kwɔ aləŋə fi bə́ta gwɔ mə́ndya lɔkte, ŋ́ bin te	so they went off and preached repentance. 
a bə̀ə̀ bab gò soŋ à geh.	if it is like that you tell me.
rɔkta	complete
bənu mi é enənyə á ntí byɔ, bənu nchɛm mi é fya bəguʼ, bənu nchɛm mi é bɔŋ ́ŋ́ dɛ̌, bənu nchɛm	whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is gracious,
go le gé zɔ̌, ŋ́nyá byɔnyɔŋ á nyɛ́elɛʼ bi é lɛ̌fə.	you drove away the nations and planted it.
ébî é chɨ elɛʼ nchap-bya ébî isɛre. a le tuŋ ngwasung isɛre ébî mbaŋa nghə bó ghɔ	with twelve standing-stones for the twelve tribes of israel. then he directed certain young
nda-nda, mbɛ̂ fwɛt-fwɛt gwʉk a se ntsɔ eleʼ nchɛm. ŋwɔ́ ngəʼ gi bəbyɔ se njyɔ	therefore, we are not discouraged rather, although our outer self is wasting away,
à wɔ à baŋŋ nnɔ̀ŋ er fih bi'ì lɛ̀?	who has fainted and is lying there like that?
ta cheʼte, mbə á ndya-atyɔ, byɔ te f ́ ʉ́ʼ ŋ́jyɔ gɛ bɔ.’ ́	naked and you gave me no clothing, ill and in prison, and you did not care for me.’
bəsɔ mi bó ghə, eləŋ ndɛn lejɨʼ.	the promised eternal inheritance.
a bəŋte.	he should roll on the ground.
achyɛ́-byɔ, é kwɔ mbə lě go nǎ nsaŋa bəfɛ byɔnyɔŋ, mbɛ̂a gwɔ bə kwɛre	if you, o lord, mark iniquities, lord,
tè zà mbìàŋte ntsèà wuɔ!	stop wasting that water!
à kèh babe atu zoh a tei bɔ̀ŋ.	he did not trim your hair well.
a ŋkei mbɔ elìàh, ò soŋ à geh.	when/if he happens to build a bridge, tell me.
esɔ za é té lɛʼ mě bɔ́.” jisɔs a le lyɔ bap anuza emɔʼ byɔ é le nǎ nghə, “fwɛt-fwɛt	forgiveness he is guilty of an eternal sin.’ this was because they were saying, ‘an unclean spirit is in him.’
pia à leih bàŋ tɛ̀ mbʉg.	the avocado got ripe to the extent of getting bad.
gɛ́ mé. bəbyɔ zá le, atɛm za bəbyɔ é ŋáŋá mə́ a ngɔŋ fɔ́, ézâ se bə mbinyɛt jɨbyɔ,	for what is seen is transitory, but what is unseen is eternal.
ndrɔ, bó mbaŋá za a fya á mbó mə́, é fya gɛ etyɔ́	with your rod and your staff that give me courage.
bìgle nzèm.	send it back.
à lɛ̀ e bɔ-ɔ elìàh.	he will build a bridge one day.
nko gi é kɔŋ a le ghə bənu, bɛʼ dəvɛ a kɔŋ, legʉ a lɔgɔ gap. 	and they who belong to his company experience it.
pia à bàŋ mʉʉ.	the avocado is ripe.
“byɔ bi é tɛn ndəŋ-ndəŋ á nzɔ́ndɛm é bín chɔʼ á mbó jɨ nghə, ‘ achyɛ-́byɔ, bʉ́k le jyɔ	then the righteous will answer him and say, ‘lord, when did we see you hungry 
pia à kàà bàŋa.	the avocado is not yet ripe.
jɨ é ji gi nghə, “nchɨ-akate, a ta se nshɨla go bɛʼ bəbyɔ se fɛʼ kʉ́ bɔ́ kɔ́?” jisɔs a lô	he woke up, rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, “quiet!  be still!”
le jyɔ	watch
mbate	next
bəfwɔ tashish bó elɛʼ mi ntsa gabe é kɛgɛ gi	the kings of tarshish and the isles shall offer gifts;
ò kei tsoŋ -ŋŋ ?	have you tied it?
ò tsoŋ mʉʉ lε ?	have you tied it?
o bab a gà bɔ̀ŋ njiɔ a geh jiɔɔ.	if you trim it badly, then you will get it hot.
le bware nyɛt mə ese, mbə le za bətɛna mo. bənu myɔ é te lebyɔ za. byɔ bi zɔla	kindness, goodness, trustfulness, gentleness and self-control. there can
bɔ́	build
bətʉ̌júnɛ́mî bə́zɔ̌á ndya achyɛ́-byɔ, é sɛɛ á ndya ndɛm bəbyɔ	so that each may receive recompense,
ŋ kwaʼe ndɔŋ za é ghə bə́kwɛre ma atʉ̌. ŋ tɔŋ lelɛn achyɛ́-byɔ	i will take the cup of salvation, and call on the name of the lord.
à kei bu' -uʉ?	has he played it?
à bu' mʉʉ lε?	has he played it?
à bàb à go, ò soŋ à geh.	if he cheats you, tell me.
ŋ dɛ̌mbə ŋ gǎlɛ á nyɛ́ana bətʉ̌van a jɛ	what more was there to do for my vineyard
té fə́ á nyɛ́ mbinyɛt tɛ sɛʼɛ gi bɔ́. é ji mbə lě é lɛ̌ emɔʼ eləŋ bə́ lɔk mbinyɛt krist	we are careful not to judge people by what they seem to be, though 
legɔlyɔ. eləŋ gî fwɛt-fwɛt-ndɛm a fʉ́ʼʉ́, égî a nâ nchɨ enənyə á nyɛ́bənu ndɛm,	he hears, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. he will glorify me, because he will
à gʉ̀-ʉ e bo-te.	he will join it later in the day.
le gapte	share
mbə̀glea	to feel sick
ò fəa e bi-i.	you will one day get missing.
mbware é bə á mbó byɔ bi é bɔk ndɛm	blessed are those who fear the lord.
ndɛm a le chɨ gɛ nkəte bənu júnɛ, ́ émî a la te chɨ á mbó bimɔʼ ewɔŋkə bi, ébî é lǎ	namely, that the mystery was made known to me by revelation.
gi nghə á mbó ɛrɔn égî a nkɛm-ndɛm te bap bɔ á mbó amɔʼ ŋwɔ́gi, égî mbaŋa	or to one of the priests among his descendants.
achyɛ́-byɔ a byɛba gɛ, amɔʼɔ jɛm za ŋ boŋ a te bə	the lord is my shepherd i shall not want.
à bo-o ŋgya.	he will build a house.
mosɛs a le soŋə á mbó byɔnyɔŋ, ŋ́ chɛta gap nghə, “legɔlyɔ, byɔ toŋte bənu ndɔk	ever since god created man upon the earth ask from one end of the sky to the other:
ŋ́ nyik tubo go abɛgɛ nyɛt mə́. nə́ŋ nkə́ʼté, ŋ́ bɛm!”	and all the trees of the field shall know
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a bag-a.	this plantain will get sour.
ŋgàà mò ?	how are you dear?
mbware é bə́á mbó ndɛm, égî a mbê ma achyɛ́-byɔ bəbyɔ jisɔs krist. a fə́á nyɛ́	in all wisdom and insight, he has made known to us
à kei tem -mm ?	has he shot it?
à tem mʉʉ lε ?	has he shot it?
le ki'te	explain
shɛba, é fʉʼʉ. bó lɔk gɔl bó elee é fʉʼʉ, é fya bəshyɛ́le á mbó ndɛm.	all from sheba shall come bearing gold and frankincense, and proclaiming the praises of the lord.
enənyə le bənu mbɔŋ bó lekak é zɔla gɛ	only goodness and kindness follow me
ndrɔ, ŋ́ dili nyɛt jɛ.” ndɛm a ghə, “a gwɔ soŋɔ go nghə go kɛʼɛ achɛn te ndrɔ? go	so i hid.’ ‘who told you that you were naked?’ he asked. ‘have you been eating of the
le fʉ'te	quantify
mbote	to join
a tei bə.	it is not there.
ò kàh wu ntema a nɔ̀ 	you were shooting an animal yesterday.
ŋwɔnyɔŋ gi á ngɔŋ á kʉ bɔ.	nor does he rejoice in the destruction of the living.
mbwaʼe	something that calms down evil spirits
mbware	something that calms down evil spirits
enənyə le, ana bətʉ̌van achyɛ-́byɔ, gi a lɔkte byɔnyɔŋ,	not to send rain upon it.
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a baga.	this plantain is sour.
ŋ́bin tuŋɔ gap á bɛtelehɛm mə́nkrɔ nghə, “byɔ ghɔ ŋ́píté nfɛʼ alɨʼ za ŋwɔ́a mə́, byɔ	until it came and stopped over the place where the child was.
tè bòŋtè atu ŋua!	don't confuse the child!
mbó bətʉ̌júnɛ́é sɛkte, ŋ́ghɔ tɛ́mbyɔ á nyɛ́alɛʼ-alɛʼ-ntsa	it put forth its foliage to the sea,
ŋwete bɛʼ ŋwɔ-́tʉ̌olif gi a se ntsɔ̌	around your table.
a brəə.	it is missing.
bɛʼ emik ngaŋ betʉʼ á nyɛ́myɛ́ŋwɔ gi,	so are our eyes on the lord, our god,
fɔ́ lɛt. bə́ le lɛt é myɔ, nza lě é ghə́ byɔ za lě jisɔs a krist, mbə ŋwɔ́ ndɛm. byɔ	to sing praise to your name, most high,
àkɔ̀fe a bàŋ mʉʉ	coffee is ripe.
àkɔ̀fe a kei bàŋ .	coffee is ripe.
gúŋ amɔʼɔ ajɛm á nyɛ́legini gwɔ, ndɛʼ mbáŋá. a le bin nza ghə byɔ bɛʼ gúŋ abələk,	whatever place does not welcome you or listen to you,
amɔʼ mengwi a lǎ, égî ali a lǎ túŋ mə ́á nyɛt́jɨ nguʼ nchap-bya te jɛʼ́ɛ.́ bəlɔkta é lǎ bô mə́nvɛn a le bú gi, a te tyɔ.́ a la byaŋte mə ́nkap za nchɛm, ndɔgɔ a le tyɔ,́	daughter is about to die! please come and touch her,
jisɔs	jesus
ézâ ŋ kɛ́ghə lɛ?	that i had not done?
go za le mə́nkábá mə́té zɔ, ́ ŋ́mbé mə́te nale lɛ? gó lɛ̌ghɔ̌é ně nkap jɛ á ndya-nkap,	should you not then have put my money in the bank so that i could have got it back with interest on my return?
gò ba	you cover
ŋ ghə ajɛm za ŋ de jɨʼɨ a le ghə á mbó achyɛ́-byɔ á nzɔ byɔ bi bəchɛm	my vows to the lord i will pay in the presence of all his people.
a lò-u e bɔ̀ŋ-ŋ.	it will be good tomorrow.
bəboŋ bó ma byɔ bi é te kuʼ a le kwite nyɛt jap bɔ.́	and the afflicted when he has no one to help him.
bətʉ̌van mi ŋ de tɛʼɛ.	and the people of judah are his cherished plant;
bɛʼ a kuʼɔ le guŋ. a le fya amɔʼ ngaŋ bətʉʼ nkap bətɔsɛn betɛ̌, ŋ́fya amɔʼ bətɔsɛn	then he went away. immediately the one who received five talents went and traded with them,
á nyɛ́eleʼ nchɛm á nyɛ́ngɔŋ jɛ.	all the days of my life;
a fə́a myɛ́-ntsa, é byɔ á nyɛ́nduri alɛʼ	and from the river to the ends of the earth.
a bin nyiga gap alɨʼ fî bó kwɛre.	and he brought them to their desired haven.
\ŋáŋ ngɔŋ jo á nyɛ́ nza za go te bɔ́ŋ ngəʼ byɔ ma bə-juw, te bap bɔ́, byɔ bi te	the glory of god. never do anything offensive to anyone – to jews or
ndrɔ abɔ.” a za ndyɔ á mbó bó nghə, “ndya za bə́lɔkte gwɔ mə́ntí, byɔ ŋáŋ mə́	in testimony against them.” 
ewɔŋkə bi bɛʼ a le kɔ́ŋ le a bə́. a le ghə bap nza le bə́shyɛla gi á nyɛ́ myɛ́mbware	in him we were also chosen, destined in accord with the purpose of the one
 à bìn tè bitla nziaa à geh bɔ mbou'!	he no longer knows me!
à lò-u e baŋ-ŋ.	he/she will faint tomorrow.
mɑ̌ gò a wɔ ?	who is your mother?
à kèh bìgle lɛ̀?	did he return it?
bo se mbìàà akèndɔ̀ŋ.	they are peeling a lot of plantains.
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a kε'	this plantain got sour this morning.
kà' mbag.	this plantain got sour this morning.
 ebwɔ-betat, byɔ ké ta ntí-elɨʼ fin bɔ, ́ égî aleʼ júnɛ́a bə lɔgɔ gwɔ bɛʼ nchɔŋ bɔ. by ́ ɔ̌	but you, brothers and sisters, are not in darkness, for that day to overtake you like a thief.
atɔʼá́ngá	locality
anu bɛʼɛ a le ji ntuŋ, te bap bɔ́, ŋwɔ juʼ amɔʼ myɛ́ anu bap kɔ́?	or did any god venture to go and take a nation for himself from the midst of another nation,
məndrɔ? bʉ́k le jyɔ go fɔ, go nǎ ngw ́ ɔ̌, bʉ́k chéʼta go, kě go bə́a ndya-atyɔ, b́ ʉ́k ghɔʼ ŋ́jyɔ go?’	when did we see you ill or in prison, and visit you?
e lèh brəə.	it got missing/quenched the day before yesterday.
à wɔ a wùɔ̀ -ɔ̀ɔ̀ ? 	who is this?
fya byɔnyɔŋ lekak, go ŋwɛt é bɔ́ŋ lekak, anuza ebuŋ mbɔŋ mi é myɛ́-ntsa	then you shall be radiant at what you see, your heart shall throb and overflow,
mi bə́ ta se njyɔ bɔ́. a bap anuza ebuŋ mi bə́ se njyɔ é te ŋáŋ bɔ́, bi bə́ te jyɔ é lɛʼ	beyond all comparison, as we look not to what is seen but to what is unseen;
ntə̂ʼ	main earth mother dance performance of nweh people
mbem	to agree
gò la' ntiɔ̀te -ee?	did you sleep well?
gò la' ntə̀te -ee?	did you sleep well?
bətʉ̌mi é mbɛʼ, é fə́mə é za le mə́achyɛ́-byɔ, é bə sɔʼɔ shyɛ tʉ̌mə ese, ŋ́ bin	they shall bear fruit even in old age vigorous and sturdy shall they be,
lí	horse tail used as a dancing prop
ghɔ achɛna lebě ŋ́ mbɔ nkɔʼ-ndɛm á lɔk shyɛla gi. a le bin za mbɔ étɔ nchap-bya,	into writing, and early next morning he built an altar at the foot of the mountain, 
ghɔ legini. eləŋ le kap é le kuʼu, a tuŋ bəgaŋ bətuʼ bi á mbó byɔ bi é le lɔǵ ɔ́ana nghə bó fya é bi	he sent his servants to the tenants to obtain his produce.but the tenants seized the 
byɔnyɔŋ é nə́ŋ bəsɔ ŋ́ mbwɛre nyɛ́t ŋ́ zɔle ndɛm. bó le turi bəfwɛt-fwɛt te bɔ́ŋ á	and set me on my feet, and i heard the one who was speaking say to me:
à fəa e bag-le elʉ̀'.	he will make a clutter of noise.
ndɛm a le shwuʼɔ gap á nyɛ́atu-lelɔk nghə, bó bɛʼ binjɛm á mbó hɛrɔt. bó le chɛʼ	and having been warned in a dream not to return to herod, 
à kèh bìn nzèm ar alǝk.	he returned to town.
ebwɔ-betat,	and would sleep and rise night and day
mə́. a bin ndyɔ á mbó mə́ nghə, “mbware jɛ za é nyɛ́ go é kuʼu, anuza go jyɔ etyɔ́	but he said to me, “my grace is sufficient for you, for power is made perfect in weakness.”
mafwɔ	female close assistant to the chief
a chɨ le ajɛm za ndɛm a le laʼé, á túŋɔ́ á ndɛn. á lɔ́k bap nchɨ le ndɛm a fya kwɛʼ	but a walking stick no food, no sack, no money in their belts. 
à kei bìàŋ ndòò.	he has already spoiled it.
à bìaŋ mʉʉ ndòò.	he has already spoiled it.
eləŋ gî bə fya ebuŋ nchɛm á mbó ŋwɔ, ŋw ́ ɔ́a bin ghɔ mə́mbó ndɛm égî a fya	when everything is subjected to him, then the son himself will also be subjected to the one who subjected everything to him, 
mi jɨ a juʼu, é soŋɔ gwɔ sá bənu mi é lǒ tuŋ. a fya gɛ bəguʼ, anuza a kwi asoŋɔ jɛ é fya á mbó byɔ. 	he will take what is mine and declare it to you.
ndya isrɛ é lyɔ lě, “a bɔ́ŋ bəcha eləŋ nchɛm”	his mercy endures forever.”
bo	they cover
ba e ba	they cover
à kèh bìàŋte ŋkap zìàh tɛ̀ e mè.	he wasted all his money.
eleʼ nchɛm á nyɛ́ngɔŋ jɛ	all the days of my life
gwɔ bó amɨkte za byɔ bɔŋ ́ á nyɛ́jisɔs ŋwɔ gi ndɛm a jɔʼɔ. a le rɔkte mə́ebwɔ-betat, byɔ guŋ	will guard your hearts and minds in christ jesus. finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, 
a brɔ̀gle enyiet.	he should stir his body.
pitá	adjust
à kei bem -mm ?	has he/she accepted/agreed?
ebwɔ-betat,	brothers and sisters,
ajɛm nchɛm za bə́ bɔŋɔ á le ghə.	lord and all the ordinances. in answer, all the people said
bɛmaagree- bɛma	answer
le bɛm	answer
bʉk ta nzɔ go lɛ́. bənu te bɔŋ bɛʼ le kwaʼe nyɛt,	for we are more than sated with contempt our souls are more than sated
ń tei boŋ-ŋ ba' ŋ̀ gʉ̀ bab bɔ.	i won't confuse on what to do.
ŋ̀kɔŋ	giraffe
mbì 	to rot
a bem -mm?	should he/she accept?
nza le ŋ gé binjɛm, abe a kwɔ á ntenchɔʼ. byɔ kwi émɛ̂nkap á mbó jɨ, ŋ́fya á mbó	now then! take the talent from him and give it to the one with ten. for to everyone who has,  
məndya map a mə.”	amaziah, priest of bethel, said to amos, off with you, visionary, flee to the land of judah! 
gi mengwi a se mbô ngwɔ.̂ ŋ sɛnte, fʉʼɔ ́nale abó jo á nyɛ ́jɨ, nza lě a tyɔ,́ é ŋáŋ ngɔŋ!” jisɔs le juʼu bap, ŋ́ fə ́ase ndo, bó jɨ é ji a le ghɔ. achɛʼɛka ŋwɔnyɔŋ gi a le gaba gi mbuŋ, á zɔla gi.	and when he saw jesus, he went over to him. he kneeled at jesus feet and started begging for help. he said, “my 
èntə̀ŋ	a marker of the ntang
faŋ nchya bətʉ̌ nchɛm, ŋ́ fya bəmyɛ́ mbo, nza lě bəsəŋ mi é lebu ndrɛ́tá é kwɛt	but to his own disciples he explained everything in private.
bə-juw bɔ, te bap bɔ́ byɔ bi é zɔle ndɛm. ghə bənu bɛʼ mə nǎ nghə. á nyɛ́	greeks or to the church of god; just as i try to be helpful to everyone at
o lòù mbabte nnatle mə̀ŋ m fʉ̀' ndɔ̀g.	look for it tomorrow and keep let me come and collect.
eləŋ mě bɔ. fwɛt ́ -fwɛt a ké mbin nchɨ á mbó bəkɛm bi, bó má bəchɨ-nkrɔ bi, byɔ bi	it was not made known to people in other generations 
gwɔ enənyə, ŋ se bin leʼ zɛ nó bəluʼ myɔ bɔ́, tɛ́ bɛʼ ŋ nó bəluʼ esə a lefwɔ ndɛm.”	new wine in the kingdom of god.’
mbaŋ 	lose consciousness
à pee enyiet ziàh tàà'.	he pays himself alot.
nwamɛtɔʼ	name of locality
za lě aleʼe achyɛ́-byɔ a fʉʼʉ á bɛʼ nchɔŋ gi a fʉʼ ntí-trɔʼ. eləŋ gî byɔnyɔŋ é lyɔ lě, “abě	for you yourselves know very well that the day of the lord will come like a thief at night.
gò lɛ'ε e bɔ̀-ɔ bendrɔh.	you will spread out clothes one day.
a fɛʼ mə́ebuŋ bi bə́lɔgɔ ntɛma məndrɔ, ŋ́bɔ́ŋ mbó mi é kɔ́ŋɔ́le ghə bətʉʼ.	all the days of her life.
ebuŋ bɔ́ kɔ́, a te ŋwɔ́ mɛri bɔ́ kɔ́, a ta a ndo ma jems, ma josɛf, ma judas, ma	and the brother of james and joses and judas and simon? and are not his sisters here with us?” 
atú manjikwáláŋ	german's head (gustav conrau)
gɛ á mbɔŋɔ eləŋ bəfɛ.” ŋ dɔk bɛ́ʼɛ́ é bô kwiʼi bɛm bəfɛ mɛ, nza le etyɔ́ krist é bə́ á nyɛ́ mə́.	i will rather boast most gladly of my weaknesses, in order that the power of christ may dwell with me.
lècèli	hand-held double metal gong
le jú'	understand
a bɔ èlìàh.	he should build a bridge.
n tem a nyà.	let me shoot an animal.
à fà'à e bə'-ə. 	he wants to break it.
ŋ̀ kwɔ̀bètʉ	a place at the palace gate where bekems leave their caps, a stick is usually pinned to the ground for that purpose
ò bə̀ kù' a le giala mə mə̀ -ə̀ə̀?	what can you do to me?
à bieb-e.	he will guard.
a wu mboo elìàh.	he is building a bridge.
à kèh bate a gih.	he came closer to him.
é tɛn nchɛm. a le fɛʼte á mbó b ́ ó a le za kwɛʼ eləŋ gî saŋ júnɛ́a le túŋ. a le juʼ bap,	and behold, the star that they had seen at its rising preceded them, 
ŋ te bɛm bəgaŋ mbwɔ mɛ, é bɔŋ lekak atú mə bɔ́	and did not let my enemies rejoice over me.
a bɔŋ nchya nch ́ ɨʼte-bətoŋe bó ma bəkwaŋ.	her value is far beyond pearls.
le fɛ'	locate
mbà	to abhor
mbɛ̀	to abhor
jisɔs a ge rɔkte nghə, “byɔ byɛp nyɛt, anuza byɔ ta aleʼe bó eləŋ gi ŋwɔ́ŋwɔnyɔŋ a	'amen, i say to you, i do not know you.' therefore, stay awake,
achyɛ-́byɔ a ghə: mə ŋwɛt ŋ dəŋte mənjɨ mɛ, é byɛpba gap bɛʼ mbyap-ebuŋ-nkrə a	thus says the lord god: i myself will look after and tend my sheep. as a shepherd tends his flock when he finds himself
ebwɔ-betat, bə́le bʉʼɔ jisɔs á nyɛ́legʉ́, á bə́nzɔ ŋwɔ á nkó byɔ bi é lǎ kʉ́mə́	brothers and sisters, christ has been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
ndya-ndɛm alɛʼ fə́.” ɛmos a le bin chɔʼ á mbó amazya nghə, “ŋ te nchɨ-nkrɔ ndɛm	the lord took me from following the flock, and said to me, go, prophesy to my people israel.”
kwáŋ bəngwi-fwa	an exclusive special dance by the wives of fon or chief
le fúrí é le guŋ mənkɛʼ map té né é mɔʼ bəvɛt-nkɛʼ. bi le bɔŋ eza é le nyik é mɔʼ ́	the foolish ones, when taking their lamps, brought no oil with them,
mbabte	to search
takəkə á mbó jɨ é ghə a ləŋte, nza lě ndɛm á bə ebuŋ nchɛm á mbó ŋwɔnchɛm.	so that god may be all in all.
ponŋ	young shoot of a palm tree
bɔ́	create
bó lɔgɔ elɛʼ bəbyɔ ŋ́ soŋɔ bəmyɛ́ bənu mi ndɛm a ghə!” 	yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues of the mighty acts of god.”
àkù a brə̀ə.	the leg got rotten
eləŋ kuŋte mə́, égî a ghə byɔ bi é bɔgɔ gi é kwɛre	justice shall walk before him, and prepare the way of his steps.
bələŋə-ləŋə map, émî é lɛ̌ntí ngəʼ, é ghɔ	their hearts melted away in their plight.
m̀ bòŋ-le a go.	i will disown you.
ò kei bɔŋ esea -aa?	have you got a solution to the problem?
ò bɔŋ mʉʉ esea -aa?	have you got a solution to the problem?
asoŋɔ achyɛ́-byɔ á enənyə	upright is the word of the lord,
byɔ te lɔkta gɛ mə́ndya bɔ. ́ mbə́achɛn te ndrɔ, byɔ ta gɛ məndrɔ fya. ŋ nǎ ngwɔ̌, byɔ	you gave me no drink, a stranger and you gave me no welcome,
ŋ bɔŋ lekak á mbó achyɛ́-byɔ	and you renew the face of the earth.
gò lò-u e bɔ̀-ɔ bendrɔh.	you will spread out clothes tomorrow.
ŋwɔ gi a bə dʉ́ ngɔŋ, a gwɔ? ndɛʼ ŋwɔ gi a bɛm le jisɔs a ŋwɔ́ ndɛm. á ŋwɔ gi a le lɔk	when he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. the disciples rejoiced when they saw the lord.
jɨ ma a turi byɔ isrɛ á ntí məngəʼ	and he will redeem israel from all their iniquities.
kóŋkáŋ	handheld (single) metal gong
lechɛtla	handheld (single) metal gong
byɔ bi é se nchəŋə bəcha mi bó nkɔŋ za,	upon those who hope for his kindness,
tuŋ fwɛt-fwɛt go ma achyɛ́-byɔ, ŋ́ bwɛre ngoŋ é chɛʼ za sə́	lord, send out your spirit, and renew the face of the earth.
soŋ a gih a ba acèn à ziah.	tell her to cover her genitals.
é la eleʼ mě, fwɛt-fwɛt ndɛm a kwɔ á nyɛ́mə́, ŋ́ ghə ŋ tɛna ase, njuʼ a nâ	rebels who have rebelled against me
nghə ŋ fwɛt-fwɛt gɛ gi a se nkɛ̌, a tyɔte.	he refreshes my soul.
“ngaŋ á bɔŋ agwɔ-kap, á te lɛ̌.” nkɛm-ndɛm a bɔŋ le soŋ byɔnyɔŋ le a bɔŋ	by reason of the sore on his head. “the one who bears the sore of leprosy
à gʉ̀-ʉ e ba-a.	he will cover it later on.
eləŋ gî jisɔs bó bajiʼi á mbó jɨ é le bə́, a ghə nkrəʼte bənu njǎ, émî bə́ tá ntí akate	it is good to give thanks to the lord,
go lɔk bəvɛt ŋ́jɔʼɔ atú jɛ	you anoint my head with oil
jɨleŋwɛt a le soŋ, anuza fwɛt-fwɛt á mə́ enənyə.	and when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them, “receive the holy spirit.
à kàà bə̀ŋta.	he has not licked it.
batta mfʉ̀' ebòggò e gʉ̀ɔ njiɔ a gih.	prepare and come let us go and see him/her.
bi é kɛ̌ jyɔ, tɛʼ nké bɛm!” 	as i, the lord, have spoken, so will i do.
ŋ de nǎ nchəŋə lě é fya eta bɔŋ. ́	why, when i looked for the crop of grapes,
“ŋ mbɔ́ŋ bənu é já a le soŋɔ gwɔ, tɛʼ é bin mbô njá nchya gwɔ a le beʼe	comes, he will guide you into all the truth; for he will not speak on his own, but will speak whatever
ló ase ŋ́chɨ nkɛʼ go, anuza nkɛʼ go é fʉʼ mə. bəguʼ achyɛ́-byɔ é fʉʼɔ á	rise up in splendor, jerusalem!  your light has come, the glory of the lord shines upon you.
ò kei zɔ̀glè a eshuɔ gò -òò?	have you greeted your friend?
achoŋé	harvested short ends of shrubs
é bɛʼ́ɛ́mbə́le nala achyɛ-́byɔ,	by the lord has this been done, and it is wonderful in our eyes?
elɛʼ mi é ngɔŋ nchɛm é ŋwaʼa se é shyɛla go ma achyɛ́-byɔ	lord, every nation on earth will adore you.
ngyɛt, anuza byɔnyɔŋ é la te ndɛm bɛm. a le bin ndǒ nghɔ, nchɨ nkrɔ-mbɔŋ á	apart from curing a few sick people by laying his hands on them.
jǎ	drive
etaa	five
a chɛʼ nfʉ́ʼ. bi betɛ bi é kɛʼ bit mbɔŋ b ́ ə́vɛt́-nkɛʼ map é zɔla gi ŋ́kwɔ á ndya apɔ, bə́	go instead to the merchants and buy some for yourselves.'
eshwɔ	friend
à gʉ̀-ʉ e baŋ-ŋ.	he/she will faint later on in the day.
bajiʼi á mbó jisɔs é le lǒ ŋ́ ghɔ ma aləŋə ŋ́ jyɔ́ takə a bə́ bɛʼ jisɔs a kɛʼ ndyɔ. bó	and when he had said the blessing he broke it and gave it to them. ‘take it,’ he said ‘this is
saŋá	calculate
le sáŋ	calculate
à làà bìgla.	he has never returned it.
ŋ́jwɔ́myɔ.’ ewɔŋkə́bangwi ébî é le fúrí, é le lǒ nghɔ á njwɔ́bəvɛt-nkɛʼ, tangwinghɔ	'no, for there may not be enough for us and you.
achyɛ́-byɔ á byɛpbe gɛ bɛʼ mbyɛp-ebuŋ-nkrə a byɛp bənya bi,amɔʼɔ jɛm za ŋ boŋ a te bə́	the lord is my shepherd; there is nothing i shall want.
ŋwɔ gi bə́gwɛʼ bəsɔ mi.	whose sin is covered.
kuri	small drum about 60cm
à kei be -ee?	has she/he picked it?
à be mʉʉ lε?	has she/he picked it?
bap nza lě byɔ bi ndɛm a tɔŋ é bɔ́ŋ ngɔŋ te me, anuza legʉ́ krist a tura gap á nyɛ́	from transgressions under the first covenant, those who are called may receive 
m̀ bèè a go, ò mè.	if i lay my hands on you, you 'will finish' -die.
tè bab!	don't trim it!
ŋ́dyɔ anu, á tɛn bap	he commanded, and it stood forth.
bəfwɛt-fwɛt te bɔ́ŋ ma fya gi etyɔ́ a le turi bəfwɛt-fwɛt te bɔ́ŋ á nyɛ́ byɔnyɔŋ.” bó	them to him and spoke to them in parables. ‘how can
mbɔ̀ŋ	to be good
ǹcìèh e ŋgya fà -àà ?	is there water in this house?
ǹcìèh e ŋgya fà -àà ?	is there water in this house?
a fya nyɛt za, te lefɛ, a bə́ sɔk ntí gwɔ á nyɛ́ bənu te bɔŋ la kɔ́, nza lě byɔ zɔle 	how much more will the blood of christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself unblemished to god,
á nyɛ́krist byɔ bî é juʼu asoŋə jyɔ, za a enənyə gî é fə́ á nyɛ́nkrɔ-mbɔ́ŋ, bə́ lɔk	and gave them authority over unclean spirits. 
́ndoŋ-ngoŋ nghə, “ŋ te lɛ̌, ŋ te lɛ̌.” a bə́ŋwɔ gi a te lɛ̌, te bɛʼ agwɔ-kap á mɛ̂á	as long as the sore is on him he shall declare himself unclean,since he is in fact unclean.
á njɛm á nyɛ́nkó gɛ gwɔ, go ghə mǎ á mbó mə́!’	you did for one of the least brothers of mine, you did for me.’
bəkəʼte. jisɔs a ghɔ, ŋ́ dyɔ́á mbó bó ghə, “bə́fya ma gɛ etyɔ́nchɛm a le lɔk	then jesus approached and said to them, "all power in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
à bitle.	he is still alive.
mi bəbyɔ kɔŋ ́ ŋ́bin nguʼte, bó bənu nchɛm mi bə́mɨkte nghə é bənu mbɔŋ́ te bap bɔ́bənu mi	if there is any excellence and if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things. 
tɔmas a chɔʼ á mbó jɨ nghə, “achyɛ́-byɔ gɛ, ndɛm gɛ!”	that i, the lord, bring low the high tree, lift high the lowly tree,
aŋkàndiŋà wùɔ̀ à kei bì.	this banana is rotten.
gò fǝa e bɔ̀-ɔ bendrɔh.	you will spread out clothes one day.
à kɔ̀ŋŋ a le bè' ebùɔ̀ ar enti jʉh tàà'.	he/she likes bearing people grudges a lot.
ǹ temm a nyà	i shot an animal.
nɔ̀	i shot an animal.
é lɔk bap te ntsɔ bɔ́. achɛʼ jɨŋwɛt a ghə ajɛm za bə́ zɔ̌ a tsɔ ŋ́ fya mbɛm. tó-gi a ji	is the smallest of all the seeds on the earth.
gò la' ŋgaliah?	how do you do?
gò la' ŋgàà	how do you do?
eləŋ gî hɛrɔt a le juʼu bənu myɔ, ntí gi bó gi tagwəgwə á jɛrosalɛm é bô shɨli. ntí gi	when king herod heard this, he was greatly troubled, and all jerusalem with him.
mbɔŋɔ ajok, te bap bɔ ntsɔʼ ndɛ, mbɛ é bə bə́le a bɔŋ agwɔ-kap. bə bɔŋ le lɔgɔ	which appears to be the sore of leprosy, he shall be brought to aaron, the priest,
lekeh	intermediary song during a dance performance, during which there is no dancing
mbìàŋ.	destroy
ndɔk mə́manza njɨʼɔ ŋ́binjɛm alɛʼ bó. 	they departed for their country by another way.
tè bɔg!	don't be afraid!
legha bɔ́.	to beat me, to keep me from being too elated.
“ŋwɔ gi a le lɔk nkap bətɔsɛn mɔʼfí, á f ́ ʉ́ʼ nghə, ‘myɛ-́ŋwɔ, ŋ zá le go shɨli, ŋ́kábá mə́	of fear i went off and buried your talent in the ground.
ndɛm é kwiʼi kwɔ á nyɛ́ achɛʼɛka ŋwɔnyɔŋ, bó kwiʼi é fya bəsɛnte á le lɔk nkɔŋte	so that the grace bestowed in abundance on more and more people
àkèndɔ̀ŋ a bàŋ-ŋ.	the plantain will get ripe.
é kwɔ ngɔŋ te me.” 	moses said to the people, "ask now of the days of old, before your time,
esoŋə elɛʼ bəbyɔ? bəbyɔ fə́ a patya, ma medya, ma elam; ŋ́ fə́ a mɛsopotemya,	then how does each of us hear them in his native language?
mbòŋte.	to confuse
babte enyi ar ntih ǹtàŋ fih mfia a geh.	look for a cutlass in the room and give me.
ghɔ ŋ́byɛp ana bətʉ̌van jyɔ,	and protect what your right hand has planted,
bɔ́. ŋ vɛn mə́ le ŋwɔnchɛm a bə́ á mbɔ́ŋɔ́, ŋ́ kwɛre.	everybody else, so that they may be saved.
achyɛ́-byɔ ma ghə bap, akəʼta anu za bəbyɔ é lɔk emik məmyɔ ŋ́ jyɔ.	beloved,
ntúŋ, é gé sɛte, é nsá, é bin gé rɔkte ŋ́fya mbɛm. ebuŋ júnɛ́ é tsɔ́, a kap ŋ́ ně á	but once it is sown, it springs up and becomes the largest of plants
a lɛ'-ε e bɔ̀ŋ-ŋ.	it will be good one day.
ndɔŋ jɛ, é lwɔ tɛ́njiʼi	my cup overflows.
èfə̀ŋ ŋweh	the nweh alphabet
mbàb	to fool
le fɛ'te	research
ŋ́bin gɛm lebɨ ́a lefə a le lɔk nkě bəluʼ.	within it he built a watchtower,
nghə mə́bap á nyɛ́bó sǎ. a gé rɔkte, ŋ́túŋ ŋwɔ́gi, égî mbaŋa nghə, ‘bó juʼɔ gi, anuza á mə́ŋwɔ́	treated them in the same way.
le turi	remove
à bag-le elʉ̀'.	he will make a clutter of noise.
te me, alɛʼ fi achyɛ́-byɔ ndɛm gwɔ á fya á mbó byɔ eləŋ nchɛm.”	which the lord, your god, is giving you forever."
ekenɛt myɛ́anu mbɔŋ́ a le jyɔ̌!’ ”	therefore, i say to you, the kingdom of god will be taken away from you
le tá	plan
nchɨʼ elɨʼ é te tɛn ma lefɔ bɔ́kɔ́?”	and here shall your proud waves be stilled!
asoŋɔ achyɛ́-byɔ	the word of the lord.
àkèndɔ̀ŋ jʉ̀ɔ̀ a se mbaga.	this plantain is developing a sour taste.
mbe	to pick
à t'amɔ̀' azem boŋ.	he does not lack anything.
kwɛba	change
le kwɛ́p	change
le bô mbɔ́k elɨʼ ŋ́ tɔŋte bənyɛt map nghə, “mbaŋa gwɔ a gwɔ́? tɛ́ afɛ́m bó ntsa é júʼɔ́ a gi!”	“who then is this whom even wind and sea obey?”
jisɔs a le nâ ndyɔ bɛʼ́ɛ,́ emɔʼ byɔ é fə ́alɛʼ jarus, égî alǎ myɛ́-ŋwɔ a lémǒ ndɛm, ŋ́ dɔk nkrɔ nfʉʼ á mbó jarus nghə, “ŋwɔ ́go a kʉ́mə.́ akɔ ghə go bila ase	just have faith!” jesus did not let anyone go with him except peter and the two brothers, james
gò bɔ̀ɔ̀ bendrɔh e juŋ.	 if you spread out clothes, they will get dry.
fin, éfî a lɛ̌é ka bəsɔŋ mi.’	where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.'"
ò làà ŋgya mee boo kɔ̀ -ɔ̀ɔ̀?	have you not built that house?
ò kèh babte azem jwàtla lε?	did you look for that thing?
ŋ bə́kɔŋta achyɛ́-byɔ la kɔ́, á nyɛ́bənu mbɔŋ mi a ghə á mbó mə?	how shall i make a return to the lord for all the good he has done for me?
bɛʼ le bɛm-ndɛm bəbyɔ á nkwi, bɛʼ gi ŋwɔ gi a le lɛtle nghə, “ŋ bɛm-ndɛm, le	since we have the same spirit of faith, according to what is written, 
fʉa	chief
fʉɔ	chief
ma ntí lwɔ, ma elɨʼ fin mi bó tɛkte ŋ́bə́a mə, é nyokta gap é ghə bó kwɛle. achyɛ-́	i will rescue them from every place where they were scattered when it was cloudy and dark. i myself will pasture my sheep i
le fɛ'	search
mbɔŋ	possess
bɛma gi, mbɛ̂ byɔ bɔ́ŋ ngɔŋ te mé.	to proclaim your kindness at dawn and your faithfulness throughout the night.
pita	peter
a fya ebuŋ á mbó batekuʼ.	and her fingers ply the spindle.
a le soŋə myɛ́afɛm a fə́ase ndǒ	his command raised up a storm wind
ndɛm gî a lɔkte byɔnyɔŋ, bʉk sɛnta go nghə, zɛ́mbwɛre nyɛt jo	once again, o lord of hosts,
fhəfú	white spiritual powder
bema bey nəŋ a go.	admit it, you will be free.
go le tuŋ fwɛt-fwɛt go, a ghə gap, ŋ́ bwɛre ngoŋ é chɛʼ za sə.	pleasing to him be my theme i will be glad in the lord.
mbàŋ 	become red
ǹ deih tem a nyà 	i shot an animal a long time ago.
tè bieb!	don't guard/watch!
le tɔ́ŋ	list
pia à bàŋ-ŋ.	avocado will get ripe.
gò gàa ?	how are you?
bɛʼ emik bəfwɛt é nyɛ́myɛ́ŋwɔ gap,	as the eyes of a maid are on the hands of her mistress,
bəbyɔ. 	therefore, let us not sleep as the rest do, but let us stay alert and sober.
à bitle.	he is still there.
na fɛʼ lwɔ. jisɔs a le nɔŋ a fɛ́n akano ŋ́ ná ndě, ntəʼta atu za má jɛm. bajiʼi á mbó	they woke him and said to him, “teacher, do you not care that we are perishing?”
le chɛt	request
a kɔ́? bə́ bə lɔk é jɛt ngɛ ndɔk ngite lɛ? lefwɔ ndɛm é bɛ́ʼ ŋwɔ mbɛm ngwɛt gi bə́	with many such parables he spoke the word to them as they were able to understand it.
ndwɔ	the tuber of yam seedling to be planted
abɛgɛ-nyɛt a za. bajiʼi á mbó jɨ é le bô nkak bɛʼ bó le jyɔ achyɛ́-byɔ. jisɔs a za	now a week later his disciples were again inside and thomas was with them. jesus came, although the doors were locked, and stood in their midst and said, “peace be with you.”
agɛp	war materials of a paramount chief
ndrɔ nyɛ́t za jɨleŋwɛt, mbɛ̂ a te tɛn bɔ́, mbɛ̂ a mě. ŋwɔ bə́ gɛ sɛ́ ndya ntyɔ́ ŋ́ dɔk	he cannot stand either it is the end of him. but no one can make his way into a strong man’s house and burgle
byɔ bi é lɔk fwɛt-fwɛt-ndɛm ŋáŋ ngɔŋ, é ewɔŋkə ndɛm. bə́ la te fya gwɔ fwɛt	for those who are led by the spirit of god are sons of god.
kwɛt akě, ŋ́ nyik nchu, ŋ́ bin ghə, ‘nduri go é gwɔ, go bə́gɛ jiʼi, etyɔ́go a le lɔk	and said thus far shall you come but no farther, 
bəjaŋ nti mi é te sɛte; bənu mbɔŋ mi a ghə, é bə́eləŋ nchɛm.	for his anger lasts but a moment a lifetime, his good will.
mmə́ʼte	a particular masquerade dance performance
bənu mi ŋ mɨkta á ntí mə, é bɔŋɔ gi.	when you send forth your spirit, they are created,
mbàgtè 	to confound
ŋwɔnchɛm gi a tɔǵ ɔ, a k ́ ap etá bi	so that every passer-by plucks its fruit,
lɛ achyɛ́-byɔ?	who can stand?
sá é soŋ bənu é lɔk lata gɛ, anuza bəbyɔ le bə̌eləŋ gî ŋ de ji le ghə bənu.”	“i still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. when the spirit of truth
nza lě byɔ bi é ngɔŋ é té lɔk mə́ lelɛn lap é ŋáŋ bɔ́, bó lɔk mə́ lelɛn ŋwɔ gi a le	he died so we would no longer live for ourselves, 
mbwa ndɛm, fya fwɔ etyɔ́a le sɛʼ byɔnyɔŋ	o god, with your judgment endow the king,
njyɔ́gi, byɔ binjɛm, ŋ́soŋɔ gɛ, nzá le mə sá mb ́ ə́ghɔ shyɛle gi.”	they were overjoyed at seeing the star, 
àbo ziah a bàble.	his/her hand has bilstered, his hand blisters.
le bɛm	accept
gò bɔ̀ɔ bèndroh.	you spread out clothes.
á chɛʼɛ za kɔ́? té bənu mi achyɛ́-byɔ ndɛm gwɔ a le ghə á mbó byɔ, á ijip bɔ́ kɔ́?	in the heavens above and on earth below, and that there is no other.
ŋ tɔŋ lelɛn achyɛ́-byɔ	and i will call upon the name of the lord.
ŋ́kwaʼe ntsa gî é se nchɨʼɔ mǎ atʉ̌,	which tossed its waves on high.
o se mbàà mo wùɔ̀ ŋkwii àkɔ ?	why are you hating this child?
mbrə	to lose
èkàp	money tied with the bark of a banana stem
achyɛ́-byɔ a nkɔŋ ajɛm za a ndɛn, é bə enənyə	he loves justice and right;
à kei lə bub -ee? 	is that what he/she has said?
mbàble	to blister.
a kà' mbə kei bì.	i discovered it was rotten.
a kɛ̀' mbə brə̀ mʉʉ.	i discovered it was rotten.
le kwi'i	increase
èbùɔ̀nɔ̀ŋ e abey mfà'a o ba'te etu bab.	there are people outside looking for you to plait their hair.
le soŋ	inform
kě go bə́nghɔ-ŋwɔ, kě go bə́achɛn te ndrɔ, kě go na ngwɔ, kě mbə́á ndya-atyɔ, t́ ɛ́	 or thirsty or a stranger or naked or ill or in prison, and not
bechyɛt	rattles
lebra'a	nine
á nyɛ́eleʼ nchɛm mi ngɔŋ, a ghə gi mə́bənu mbɔŋ, a te ng ́ əʼ fya,	she brings him good, and not evil,
kwitábegin -jɨ̌	assist
le jɨ	assist
myɛ-́ŋwɔ a chɔʼ nghə, ‘go ghə́á mbɔŋɔ! gǒ ngaŋ bətʉʼ mb ́ ɔŋ gi a júʼ ́ ɔ́gɛ. go chɨ	then the one who had received the one talent came forward and said,
bìn bi'i!	go back there!
àkàka à zeh a bàŋte tɛ̀ mmè.	my cocoa has withered completely.
“a gwɔ a fɛna gɛ?” jisɔs a le nâ ndəŋta a le jyɔ ŋwɔ gi a fɛna gi. məŋgwi júnɛ ́a bin za ajɛm za a ghə gi, ŋ́ nâ nvɛtá , ŋ́mbɔgɔ, ŋ́ dɛba bəku	bother the teacher anymore?” 
te bə-juw bɔ,́ é bin ndɔk bap nkwɔ jap a nkó, ŋ́chɛʼ ewɔŋkə ndɛm sa, nfə́á nyɛ́anu	as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the spirit that the gentiles are coheirs, 
andǔ	locality
bəboŋ é bɔŋ kw ́ ɛʼ asɛʼ	and your afflicted ones with judgment.
tóŋ-ngə́ʼ	basket of food items and drinks used as a prop for funeral ceremonies
achyɛ́-byɔ a fya gɛ nchɔʼɔ te bɔ́ŋ, tɛʼ ŋ́ ké te chɨ nghə legʉ́lɔgɔ gɛ	by the lord has this been done it is wonderful in our eyes.
a bə mʉʉ.	it is now available.
achɛnabefwɔ	cabinet of rulers
à baŋ-ŋ.	he will faint.
a fʉʼ ŋ́ gaba gi. amɔʼ ŋwɔ gi bə ́tɔŋ le jarus, égî a lǎ amɔʼ myɛ́- ŋwɔ a lémǒ ndɛm, a le fʉ́ʼ njyɔ  jisɔs, ŋ́ gʉ á bəku jɨ, ŋ́ bô sɛnta gi nghə, “ŋwɔ gɛ	gathered around him. the person in charge of the jewish meeting place was also there. his name was jairus, 
jʉh bab mʉʉ.	he has already trimmed it.
à kei bo ŋgya.	he has built a house.
à bɔ mʉʉ ndiah.	he has built a house.
ndyɔ á mbó nghə, “mbware ndɛm é bə́ mə́ byɔ. bɛʼ mbê gɛ a túŋɔ́ gɛ, ŋ se túŋɔ́	then he said to thomas, “put your finger here and see my hands, and bring your hand and put it into my side, and do not be unbelieving, but believe.”
le byɔre	translate
tètsìà-àkàh	the middle drum of nweh threesome drum about 70cm
gò bɔŋ-ŋ ŋkap e juɔ-ɔ tècìyì tèbetu.	when you will have money, you will buy useless things.
a le nǎ nchəŋə lě bətʉ̌van mi é fya eta mbɔŋ, ́	and hewed out a wine press.
mey liɔɔ ò ten ar alʉ̀' mbòŋle.	why are you claiming innocence?
mbəbɨyɔ́	a plant leaf for troh (piper auritum or sacred pepper)
eləŋ gî adam a le fɛtle atá-tʉ̌, ndɛm achyɛ́-byɔ a tɔŋɔ gi ŋ́ dyɔ á mbó jɨ nghə, “go	the lord god called to the man. ‘where are you? he asked.
ŋ kei la' mbab ndòò.	i have already trimmed the hair.
ǹ da' me mbab ndòò.	i have already trimmed the hair.
rɔktá	complete
a kei bì.	it is decayed/rotten.
a brə̀ mʉʉ.	it is decayed/rotten.
mbó bətʉ̌júnɛ́é le tabe tɛ mbyɔ a myɛ-́ntsa	its shoots as far as the river.
le tɨ'abo	sign
ndɛm achyɛ́-byɔ a ghə, “məŋwɛt ŋ jɛʼɛ lechyɛ atʉ̌za bə tɔŋ le sɛda é lɔk ghɔ, é	the just one shall flourish like the palm tree, like a cedar of lebanon shall he grow.
alɛʼɛ-alɛʼɛ-ntsa ŋ́ ghɔ mə́ zamɔʼ abɛk.” bó lǒ á nkó. bajiʼi á mbó jɨ é kwɔ á ntí	to the other side.” leaving the crowd, they took jesus with them in the boat just as he was.
à leih bin tɛ̀ ndòò. 	he finished dancing long ago.
nkəʼte bənu mi a ghə á ntí ntsa.	and his wonders in the abyss.
ò bagle elʉ̀' a cìà.	you make too much noise with objects.
a le soŋə, á tuŋ bap	for he spoke, and it was made;
túŋ nkrɔ ŋ́ ná ntɔŋɔ gi. achɛʼɛka ŋwɔnyɔŋ a le ŋáŋ ngaba gi, ndyɔ mbó jɨ nghə,	outside, sent in a message asking for him. a crowd was sitting
bə́kɔŋte ndɛm	thanks be to god.
à wɔ mee à kɛ̀' mbab atu joh -oo?	who trimmed your hair this morning?
emik mʉk é nyɛ́achyɛ́-byɔ ndɛm gwʉk, tɛ bɛʼ a chɨ gwʉk bəcha mi	till he have pity on us.
gɛ.’ eləŋ gî byɔ bi é lɔǵ ɔ́ana é le jyɔ ŋwɔ́ngaŋ ana, bó le soŋ á tétsá bó nghə, ‘ŋwɔ gi a dʉ́legʉ́	finally, he sent his son to them, thinking, 'they will respect my son.'
ba' atu jeh mfia a geh.	plait my hair for me.
a fə́á nyɛ́ngəŋ alɛʼ-alɛʼ-ntsa, é guŋ byɔnyɔŋ tɛ́byɔ gimɔʼ ngəŋ.	may he rule from sea to sea,
mbem	to admit
m bem-mm?	should i admit?
mmuockmbin	name of locality
aŋkàndiŋà.	banana
à lɛ̀ e ba-a.	he/she will cover it after tomorrow.
ndya júnɛ́ é lebu. é te lɛʼ kɛma bɔ́.	we have a building from god, a dwelling not made with hands, eternal in heaven.
à kèh ba'a atu.	she plaited the hair yesterday.
achyɛ́-byɔ, go se bə alɨʼ za ŋ ndila mə, go ghə nkwɛle, mbə á ntí lekak	i turn to you, lord, in time of trouble, and you fill me with the joy of salvation.
àkèndɔ̀ŋ a kàà bàŋa.	the plantain is not yet ripe.
anuza bʉk jɨ se ngina	i fear no evil for you are at my side
ŋwɛ́	appellation of the people and their language
ŋwá	appellation of the people and their language
ləŋləŋ gwʉk a se nchəŋə achyɛ́-byɔ,	our soul waits for the lord,
à lèh bii.	he got missing days before yesterday.
à lèh brəə.	he got missing days before yesterday.
belɛ́ʼ ngáŋága	locality
ghə bənu bɛʼ mə se nghə, bɛʼ mə sá é nǎ nghə bənu bɛʼ jisɔs a nǎ nghə.	take me for your model, as i take christ.
ndiah jʉ̀ɔ̀ è bale ar eseh.	this house is low.
gwɔ sá.” eləŋ gî a le lyɔ bɛʼɛ, a le bin nyik efək za á nyɛ́ bó, ŋ́ dyɔ á mbó bó nghə,	thomas answered and said to him, “my lord and my god!”
bebia	two
bʉ̀g e ba	somebody and i cover
le sycamo. achyɛ́-byɔ a le turi gɛ á nyɛ́le ləŋte ebuŋ-nkrə, ŋ́ dyɔ á mbó mə́nghə	i will hear what god proclaims the lord for he proclaims peace.
chɛ́tá	ask
le chɛt	ask
go le lɔk van nfə́á ijip	a vine from egypt you transplanted;
azáŋ	palm fronds to enclose areas
asaba	first male child of the man
anumbɔŋ a mbín	miracle in the forest
tɛʼ é bin nfə́bɛʼ dəvɛ a le kɔŋ, élê ebuŋ nchɛm á ngɔŋ é bə bi, legʉ a kwɔʼɔ ngɔŋ	but by the envy of the devil, death entered the world,
manjɔŋ	masquerade dance
a bìgle!	he should send it back!
byɔ fə́ techoŋɔ gwɔ, nza, ŋ́ mbin nyigi á ntí byɔ, lê achyɛ́-byɔ ndɛm gwɔ, á	you must keep his statutes and commandments that i enjoin on you today,
bəfɔŋ nkwɔ bɔ́. a le lɔk má ali za jɨleŋwɛt nkwɔ, ŋ́ dɔk bap nghə bə bɔ́ŋ lekwɛre	not with the blood of goats and calves but with his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption.
akwaŋ	necklace made of leaves
nkwaʼe kɛm á sɛk, ŋ́ ghə atʉ̌fə á chɛʼ za njuŋ, ŋ́ ghə za njuŋ á chɛʼ za fə. mə́	declaring how just is the lord, my rock, in whom there is no wrong.
ndɛp	lair
ra é te lɛʼ mé bɔ́. é bə́ le bə́ lɔk ali məbrɔ bó za ebwɔ bəfɔŋ, ma abrɔ ŋ́ sɔk byɔnyɔŋ	for if the blood of goats and bulls and the sprinkling of a heifer's ashes
fossungu	name of locality
ò bè'-e.	you will carry it.
mbó jɨ, ŋ́ nyik tubo gɛ a mə, nale abó jɛ abɛgɛ nyɛt jɨ, mbɛ̂ ŋ te bɛm bɔ́.	on the mountain heights of israel i will plant it.
achyɛ́-byɔ a fya tenduri ebuŋ sá	for the praise of the glory of his grace
abogé	single metal gong
ndɛm a la te legʉ ghə, ŋ́ bin te kɔŋ, a le jyɔ,	god did not make death,
bə́ bə kɛk. byɔ bó mbila nghə mə́bənu mi byɔ le jiʼi á mbó mə, bənu mi ŋ de chɨ gwɔ, bənu mi	keep on doing what you have learned and received and heard and seen in me.
ebwɔ-bətat,	in this way we know that we love the children of god when we love god and obey his commandments.
a le, ŋwɔ gi a fə́ á mbó ndɛm, a dʉ̌ ngɔŋ. le dʉ́ngɔŋ júnɛ́, a bə́ le bɛm-ndɛm bəbyɔ.	on the evening of that first day of the week, when the doors were locked, where the disciples were, for fear of the jews, jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them, “peace be with you.”
ebwɔ-betat,	brothers and sister,
aluŋ	headgear for newly enthroned chiefs
ankwɛta	person of the rulers of a clan
go tura gɛ á ntí ngəʼ	you have loosed my bonds.
le pité	organize
kwɛʼ atɛm (atɛm za bə te lɔk mə mbó nghə bɔ́, atɛm za ŋwɔ-ngha ma te ghə) a le	passing through the greater and more perfect tabernacle not made by hands, 
é lǎ aleʼ mě, á mbwɔlɨʼ, jisɔs a lyɔ á mbó bajiʼi á mbó jɨ nghə, “bəbyɔ é jiʼi myɛ́-	on that day, as evening drew on, jesus said to his disciples, “let us cross 
bó bin ndɛ́á mbó achyɛ́-byɔ ndɔk ndata bənu mi é le jáŋá gap,	they cried to the lord in their distress;
bé	clean
ngúʼ	noble and stylish dance for the wealthy
go kwi efɛm jap, mbɛ̂bó kʉ,	may the glory of the lord endure forever
eləŋ gî jisɔs a le tuŋɔ á nzɔ bimɔʼ byɔ bɔ́. bimɔʼ bajiʼi á mbó jisɔs é le bin soŋɔ gi	thus says the lord god:
ntí nduŋ gi é ta gi kə́ʼté,	her husband, entrusting his heart to her,
gò bɔŋ a ŋùɔ̀ er fəah -aa?	do you have somebody there?
bənu mbɔ́ŋ, te bap bɔ́ mi te bɔ́ŋ mi a lɔk nyɛt za nghə á ngɔŋ fɔ́.	“to what shall we compare the kingdom of god,
mbɔ̀ŋ	to be beautiful
á ndya-atyɔ́byɔ fʉ́ʼ njyɔ á gɛ.’	you welcomed me, naked and you clothed me, ill and you cared for me, in prison and you visited me.’
kɔ́ŋɔ́ le bə́ ghɔ alɨʼ á kɔ́ ŋ́ píté ebuŋ aleʼe lékák le-jiʼi lɛ?”	passover?’ so he sent two of his disciples, saying to them, ‘go into the city and you will
achyɛ́-byɔ juʼ lelɛ lɛ.	lord, hear my voice!
à leih bɔ èlìàh.	he built a bridge a long time ago.
ŋwɔ, go le fya gɛ bətɔsɛn bebya, , é mɔʼ bətɔsɛn bebya é myɔ mi ŋ jap mǎ ntenchɔ!’	since you were faithful in small matters, i will give you great responsibilities. come, share your master's joy.' 
a se mbɔgɔ.	he is being afraid.
ebwɔ-betat,	brothers and sisters,
ŋ mbʉʼ emɨk ŋ́ ndənta go gi go ŋaŋa lebu	as the eyes of servants are on the hands of their masters.
nkhangee	a very large and almost immovable wooden drum
èfə̀ŋ	place where children come from
bogo mè mbʉh!	please, bark!
mbà	to execrate
mbɛ̀	to execrate
te bəfu mə ghə ji bɔŋ b ́ ɔ, kw ́ ɛʼ le bɔŋ ́ á nyɛ́jɨ,	she reaches out her hands to the poor,
a bɔ̀ŋ-ŋ	it will be good.
é lǎ nzɔ aleʼe á nyɛ́ eləŋ lékák abələk te kɔʼ, mbə́ aleʼe za bə́ ná nzɔ̌ ebwɔ bənjɨ	on the first day of unleavened bread, when the passover lamb was sacrificed, his disciples
isɛre, alɛʼ bəgaŋ atɛk, é byɔ bi lɔk ma atɛk, ndrɔ gɛ. bó ma bambê bap é leté ma	hard of face and obstinate of heart are they to whom i am sending you.
nchɛm. nza za a le lɔ́k nsoŋ é le ghə jisɔs a te bin nkúʼ a le ghɔ aləŋə ajɔk	jesus could no longer go openly into any town, but had to stay outside in
a bɔŋ b ́ əcha á mbó byɔ bi é te tyɔ bɔŋ, b ́ ó ma bəboŋ.	he shall have pity for the lowly and the poor;
ebwɔ-betat, ndɔk ndate eləŋ bó aleʼe, bə́te lɛtle akate á mbó ŋwɔ bɔ. by ́ ɔ bəŋwɛt é	concerning times and seasons, brothers and sisters, you have no need for anything to be written to you.
mba'te	plait quickly
a bi.	let it get missing
ebuŋ bi go ghə é sáŋá ngoŋ	the earth is full of your creatures.
a fʉʼʉ, a nyokte a legəŋ go, ewɔŋkə bó bi mbaŋa, é fə́anghashya é fʉʼʉ,	raise your eyes and look about they all gather and come to you
mbì 	to decay
fə́ a le juʼu asoŋɔ za, mbô ngyɛt ŋ́ toŋte nghə, “mbaŋa gwɔ a lɔk é myɔ bənu nfə́	they said, “where did this man get all this? what kind of wisdom has been given him?
achyɛ́-byɔ a byɛba gɛ, amɔʼɔ jɛm za ŋ boŋ a te bə	the lord is my shepherd there is nothing i shall want.
é ghə á nyɛ́ bənu mi bə́ lyɔ, á jyɔ.”	covenant that the lord has made with you, containing all these rules.’
go bɔŋ ́ lekak, é bin tsɔ̌	blessed shall you be, and favored.
“byɔ ko fwɛt-fwɛt-ndɛm. byɔ cha bəsɔ ŋwɔ, mbɛ̂ ndɛm sá a chá, ŋ́ bə́ le byɔ te	jesus said to him, “have you come to believe because you have seen me? blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.”
le jyɔ achyɛ́-byɔ jisɔs a lǒ á nyɛ́ legʉ́, ndɛm a bin fya gap myɛ́	and put them at the feet of the apostles, and they were distributed to each according to need.
fə́lebu ndəŋte ese, ŋ́jyɔ.	look down from heaven, and see take care of this vine,
bəbyɔ bî é lɛ̌ nzɔ́ byɔ a le bɛma krist, é byɔ bi bə́ le tɛʼɛ nghə é guʼte ndɛm. é fə́	jesus summoned the twelve and began to send them out two by two
á bə mɛ́ʼ ngwɛt ana jɨ, nde etrɔʼ, ŋ́ ndǒ ase á zɔgɔ. ngwɛt é sɛʼ, ŋ́ ntsɔ̂, jɨ a te za bɛʼ	it is like a mustard seed that, when it is sown in the ground,
à bà-a wʉg.	he will hate us.
bənu mi fwɛt-fwɛt ndɛm a kɔŋ, nyɛt te kɔŋ, bənu mi nyɛt kɔŋ, fwɛt-fwɛt ndɛm	self-indulgence, since self-indulgence is the opposite of the spirit, the
mbìàŋ.	to spoil
bote ebuŋ bʉ̀ɔ̀.	join this food.
nyokta mənjɨ mi eləŋ gî emɔʼ tɛkte. ŋ byɛp mənjɨ mɛ bap. ŋ ghɔ á nyɛ́elɨʼ nchɛm, bó	among his scattered sheep, so will i tend my sheep.
mə́nkwiʼi bətɔsɛn bətɛ̂á ntenchɔ.’ myɛ-́ŋwɔ a chɔʼɔ mbó jɨ nghə, ‘go ghə́á mbɔŋɔ! ́	come, share your master's joy.' then the one who had
é ké bin nfya mə́eta mi é kě nchu.	then he looked for the crop of grapes,
fwɛt-fwɛt-ndɛm a le kɔ́ŋ.	as the spirit enabled them to proclaim.
à ba'a atu ziah.	she will plait her hair.
m̀ bàb à go, ò kɔ̀ŋ -ŋŋ?	if i cheat you, will you like it?
bebya, a le taŋ esǎ ŋ́bɔŋ abe ́ bətɔsɛn bebya. ŋwɔ gi a le fya gi nkap tɔsɛn mɔʼfi, á le	but the man who received one went off and dug a hole in the ground and buried his master's money.
gò tə̀te lɛ̀ ?	are you healthy?
a lɔk mbó mi nkɛbe ŋ́bwɛre.	and works with loving hands.
pia à bàŋà ǹ dʉ.	if the avocado gets ripe, i eat it.
à leih bəŋtè 	he rolled on the ground many years ago.
jʉh lèh bemm lɛ̀?	did he/she admit it?
mbiaŋte	to roam
a bìì, ǹ cwìì à go azem.	if it gets missing, i deal with you.
e se mbrəə.	it is getting missing.
á lé bəbyɔ bə lʉ legʉ ra, bɛʼ krist, bɛʼ bəbyɔ é kuʼɔ le jyɔ ngəʼ zá a le jyɔ, nza le	and if children, then heirs, heirs of god and joint heirs with christ,
go lɔk bevɛt njɔʼ atú jɛ	you anoint my head with oil;
njɛmajɛm	type of metal gong that accompanies a fon
tɔmas a lyɔ á mbó bó nghə, “tɛ́ bɛʼ ŋ jyɔ ebya-efəŋ, ébî bə́ le lɔk mbrə́ nyigi á	from its topmost branches tear off a tender shoot, and plant it on a high and lofty mountain 
nghə bó bɛʼ kʉ eləŋ nji.	and preserve them in spite of famine.
kʉ́ atú bó é ŋáŋ, ndɛm a bin ndɔk anu jap ŋ́ mbʉʼɔ gi á nyɛ́ legʉ́. nji legɔlyɔ, bə́	but for the one who died and was raised to life for us. 
à bɔɔ èlìàh.	he builds bridges.
ò kei fəɔg -ɔɔ?	have you removed it?
ò fəɔg mʉʉ lε ?	have you removed it?
ambu muɔncɛm	to everyone
ngwɛt jo bó ngwɛt za. a chɛla atú jo, go chɔk nchɛna-ku za.” 	the woman, your offspring and her offspring. it will crush your head and you will strike its heel.”
jo é jyɔ bɛʼ go le fyá.’ “ ‘myɛ-́ŋwɔ á chɔʼ á mbó jɨ nghə, “ngaŋ sɔ, ndɔŋ te bɔŋ bɛʼ go! ́	so you knew that i harvest where i did not plant and gather where i did not scatter?
mboŋ.	to lack
mbi	to get missing
ò bagle mʉʉ elʉ̀' tɛ̀ a kù'.	you have made enough clatter of noise.
nyɛ́ bənu ndɛm, bó bəmyɛ́ bənu te bɔŋ, anuza eləŋ gî ŋ kɛ̌, mə́ gi ŋ bɔŋ etyɔ́.	hardships, persecutions, and constraints, for the sake of christ for when i am weak, then i am strong.
à fəa e ba-te.	it will one day come closer.
ləŋə-ləŋə gɛ, fya mbware á mbó achyɛ́-byɔ	bless the lord, o my soul!
mbó bó.	as for you, my sheep, says the lord god, i will judge between one sheep and another, between rams and goats.
chɨ ŋwɔ́fwɔ enənyə go,	and with your justice, the king’s son;
à tè bə.	he is not there.
á nyɛ́ bəsɔ məmyɔ. a bap nfə́ á nyɛ́myɛ́ mbware gi ndɛm a lɔk eza, bó le za bənu	so that we might exist for the praise of his glory,
bema	answer
a nale mbó mi á nyɛ́tatʉ̌gî bə lɔgɔ bwɛra məndrɔ,	she obtains wool and flax
sɛnte-ndɛm, nkɔŋte ndɛm, mbəʼ, ŋ́ fya á mbó bajiʼi á mbó jɨ ŋ́ ghə, “byɔ ko, mbinyɛt jɛ é jyɔ.”	blood, the blood of the covenant, which is to be
ndɔ́ŋ	drinking cup
à bìn-n nzèm.	he will return.
bɛm	conclude
jisɔs krist é te bənu mbi-nyɛt zɔle. é bə́ le bəbyɔ é lɔk fwɛt-fwɛt ndɛm ŋáŋ, bəbyɔ	be no law against things like that, of course. you cannot belong to
gò bàttà tɛ̀ nnəŋ, ò kò ŋua wùɔ̀ mə̀ŋ jiɔ.	when you shall have finished you come take this baby let me see.
lɔk məkɛʼ map ŋ́ghɔ á njyɔ tangwinghɔ. bi betɛ é le efúrí, bimɔʼ betɛ, é bɔŋ eza. ́ bi	who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. five of them were foolish and five were wise.
à kɛ̀' mba' atu	she plaited the hair this morning.
mbàgtè 	to force oneself to do things one does not know but claims to know
bəkwɛre á mbó byɔ bi, bó bin ndɔk bap ŋ́guʼta gi.	they were, however, to wear sandals but not a second tunic. 
a bì-ì.	it will get rotten.
a brə̀-ə.	it will get rotten.
a soŋɔ anu le ŋaŋ le mbɔŋ á mbó byɔ bi, ma byɔ bi é juʼɔ gi	the lord himself will give his benefits our land shall yield its increase.
nkɛm	notable
ndata eleʼe mî, é lɛ tɔk mə tɛ́byɔ fʉʼ, nfə́ bɛʼ ndɛm a le ghə ŋwɔnyɔŋ á ngɔŋ fɔ́.	did anything so great ever happen before? was it ever heard of?
a bɔ̀ŋɔ̀ ò fia a zeh.	when it is fine, you give my own share.
atetɛ̌	performing arena in compound
mengwi gî a bɔk ndɛm, bə́gútá gi.	and extends her arms to the needy.
mbware é bə́ á mbó byɔ bi e kɔŋ ndɛm	blessed are you who fear the lord,
asɛ́ʼɛ	protocol of the ruler of the clan
məmbrə. mənjɨ é bə́abó-luŋ jɨ, məbrɔ é bə́abó-kibi jɨ. fwɔ a bin ndyɔ á mbó byɔ bi	he will place the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
atu	hair 
à lεε  mʉʉ kɔ̀-ɔ̀ɔ̀?	good morning.
à kei la -aa?	good morning.
aleʼe lefʉ́ʼ, ézâ bə́ tɔŋ le pɛntecɔst a le kuʼu, babɛm-ndɛm é nyokte nkwi alɨʼ. é gé	when the time for pentecost was fulfilled, they were all in one place together.
bɔ̀ bendrɔh moh er fɔ̀h.	spread out your clothes to dry here.
lefɛm	secret grove where the troh society resides
nchə́ʼ	a locality in nweh
le bɛm	respond
afaŋ	social transaction
afaŋa	social transaction
bèlèŋ agʉ̀-ànù, mèlèŋ àhʉ̀ə̀-ànù 	verb tenses, moods and aspects
ebwɔ-betat,	brothers and sisters,
jisɔs krist, bó anu nkrɔ mbɔŋ.	members of the same body, and copartners in the promise in christ jesus through the gospel.
a fǝa e bɔ̀ŋ-ŋ	it will one day be good.
ŋ́ sɛʼɛ gi, mbɛ̂ bə́ bə gɛ bin nza nghə bap legɔlyɔ bɔ́. a le, tagwəgwə gî bó krist é	we once judged christ in that way. anyone who belongs to christ is 
sɛte, legi é fə́ a lebu ŋ́ sɔʼɔ bɛʼ myɛ́ afɛ́m gi ase nchɨʼɔ, ŋ́ kwɔ ndwɔ ndya nchɛm za	and suddenly there came from the sky a noise like a strong driving wind, and it filled the entire house in which they were.
ò gʉ̀-ʉ e bà-a à wʉg.	you will hate us later on today.
m̀bɔŋ m̀bɔŋ ŋgu alɛ siɔh	happy new year
mbè'	to carry on the head
brɔgla!	cool it!
ò fəa e bi-i.	you will one day incure losses.
ntura gɛ á nyɛ́nko gi é cho letsɔ, ŋ́ mbili gɛ á ngɔŋ. 	you preserved me from among those going down into the pit.
mbag	to become sour
legɔlyɔ ŋ bɛm mə bəsɔ mɛ,	then i acknowledged my sin to you,
ŋ  gʉ̀-ʉ e ten-m a nyà  	i will shoot an animal later in the day.
nghə, “bʉk jyɔ achyɛ́-byɔ!”	i, too, will take from the crest of the cedar,
nkwɛta	one of the persons of the rulers of a clan. this is the traditional prime minister of the clan
jɨ ma kwite gwʉk, ŋ́mbɛ̌gwʉk	who is our help and our shield.
a lɔgɔ gɛ́nghɔ mə́ngəŋ ntsa te jwat,	beside restful waters he leads me;
agwɔ-kap, á lɔk bap mbə le a za anu á nyɛ legwɔ gi. ŋwɔ gi á bɔŋ agwɔ-kap à	shall keep his garments rent and his head bare, and shall muffle his beard
jisɔs a bin tɔŋ bajiʼi á mbó jɨ bebya ŋ́ chɨ á mbó bó nghə, “byɔ ghɔ aləŋə, ŋwɔ gi	meet a man carrying a pitcher of water. follow him, and say to the owner of the house which
ò tè bɔ̀ŋ.	you have a bad character.
le chɔ'ɔ	open
ntaŋ, anuza eləŋ lekap é kuʼ mə.” jisɔs a za nghə, “bə́bə lyɔ le lefwɔ ndɛm é bɛʼ	and puts forth large branches, so that the birds of the sky can dwell in its shade.”
nya gi bə́tɔŋ le nzɔ, á byáŋté	the boar from the forest lays it waste,
à kèh bagle bètǒŋ meh embɔ̀ŋ-mbɔ̀ŋ 	he made a lot of noise in my ears.
ŋwɔ a le lɛʼ nzɔ́ana bətʉ̌van a za, ŋ́pala akě ndɔk ngabe. a le bɔ̌asɛm á le lɔk nk ́ ě bəluʼ, ŋ́bɔ̌	there was a landowner who planted a vineyard,put a hedge around it, dug a wine press in it, 
“ghɔ nchɨ-nkrɔ gɛ á mbó byɔ isrɛ.”	near indeed is his salvation to those who fear him, glory dwelling in our land.
ŋ̀kèh	a variety of stilt masquerade
gò bɔ̀-ɔ bendrɔh.	you will spread out clothes.
a lɔk lelɛn rá	he guides me in right paths
à kein mbo ŋgya.	he built a house this morning.
le kwaŋte	reflect
“go kɔŋɔ, mbɛ̂go bú gɛ́, nyɛt jɛ lɛ̌.”	‘you can cure me.’ feeling sorry for him, jesus stretched out his hand and
emik mʉk é nyɛ́achyɛ́-byɔ, tɛ bɛʼ a chɨ gwʉk bəcha	to you i lift up my eyes who are enthroned in heaven 
àtu ziah a neim mbàŋte ba' a se ŋgùɔ̀ɔ̀ lā.	his hair looks brownish as if he is ill.
ǹ dò-u e tem-m a nɔ̀.	i will shoot an animal tomorrow.
jɔp	then he said, “give her something to eat.”
ò binà àkɔ.	why are you dancing?
vɛn bətɔŋe mo é juʼ lelɛ lɛ	let your ears be attentive to my voice in supplication.
à fə̀à fɔ a cʉ̀tè à go ba' lε?	wherever he comes from, what is your concern there?
akɔ́ghə go bin ntɛk akě za?	why have you broken down its walls,
“satan a bə́ gǎlɛ ŋ́ joŋ satan? alɛʼ a gap nyɛt za á nyɛ́ mənkó, ŋ́ bin ná ndrɔ bənyɛt	itself, that kingdom cannot last. and if a household is
à leih bi.	he got missing a long time ago.
à leih brə.	he got missing a long time ago.
a te kɔŋ. bənu myɔ júnɛ́ é tɨʼə, é bin tɔʼɔ go á le ghə bənu mi go kɔŋ. fwɛt-fwɛt	spirit is totally against such a thing, and it is precisely because the two
fwa	chief
fwɔ	chief
ǹtǝ'	log drum
à bə-ə e na e ju'ɔ bey se ndàà.	he will surely be getting people crying.
samon bɔ́ kɔ́? té bə́ chɛʼnjɛm bi, ébî bangwi mə́ ŋáŋ fɔ́ bɔ́ kɔ́?” bó le lyɔ bap ŋ́	and they took offense at him.
bó le kwɔ aləŋə jarus, jisɔs a jyɔ bɛʼ byɔnyɔŋ é bô ntabe ŋ́ bə ́ase mbô ndɛ ̂	child is not dead. she is just asleep.” but the people laughed at him.
à kɛ̀' mbàb a gih embɔ̀ŋ-mbɔ̀ŋ.	he cheated her a lot.
bə́chɨʼ ewɔŋkə bó bi bangwi ŋ́guŋ á mbo. go bin jyɔ elɨʼ, é bô lɛ̌. ntí go é	your sons come from afar, and your daughters in the arms of their nurses.
bʉ́k ta go kwite lɛ?’	minister to your needs?’
akɔʼnjáŋ	masquerade dance
anang à kei bin -nn?	has anang danced?
ndʉʼ	type of drum
a bə-ə bab o soŋ à geh.	when it will be like that, you will tell me.
zamɔʼ alɨʼ ali a juʼ á nkɔʼ ndɛm. a le bin mbě akata lejɨʼ, ŋ́ tɔŋ, byɔnyɔŋ é zɔʼte, ŋ́	the other half he cast on the altar. and taking the book of the covenant he read it to the listening
à bit tè be.	he has not yet picked it.
à lòu e ba-a	he will cover tomorrow.
elɨʼ-fin bɔ.́ a le, bəbyɔ bɛʼ lě bɛʼ bimɔʼ byɔ é nǎ nghə, bəbyɔ bɛʼ lě ŋ́mbə á nyɛ́ezá	we are not of the night or of darkness.
me, tɛʼ tagwəgwə á nyɛ́é gi ləŋ, jisɔs kirst á bə́nzɔ. eləŋ gî a fʉʼʉ, byɔ bi, é bin kúŋté.	at his coming, those who belong to christ; then comes the end, when he hands over the kingdom to his god and father, 
mosɛs a le za nchɛta gap nghə, nfə́á nyɛ́ abɛk lebu, ŋ́ byɔ́ zamɔʼ abɛk, amɔʼ myɛ́	did a people ever hear the voice of god speaking from the midst of fire, as you did, and live?
ŋ fya bəkɛk mo ma achyɛ́-byɔ, anuza go ghə mə ŋ tsɔ á nyɛ́ngɔŋ jɛ.	i will extol you, o lord, for you drew me clear
“zɔʼta, bɛʼ soŋ ŋwɔ anu jyɔ́.” ké bin nghɔ á mbó nkɛm-ndɛm ŋ́ zale á ləŋta	yourself to the priest, and make the offering for your healing prescribed
le tǔ alɛʼ	pray god and bless the land
gwɔ é ghɔ mǎ alɛʼ za bó jyɔ ngəʼ, ézâ é te lɛʼ mé. nkó gi é tɛn ndəŋ ́ -ndəŋ á nzɔ ndɛm	and these will go off to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.”
